+++
title = "09 Chapter IX - The Raseśvara or Mercurial System"
+++
[^1]

[^1]:  Cf. Marco Polo's account of the Indian yogīs in Colonel Yule's edit. vol. ii. p. 300. Pārada-pāna is one of the practices of the Siddhopāsakas in the Śaṅkara-digvijaya, § 49, to obviate apamṛtyu, akālamṛtyu, &c.

Other Māheśvaras there are who, while they hold the identity of self with God, insist upon the tenet that the liberation in this life taught in all the systems depends upon the stability of the bodily frame, and therefore celebrate the virtues of mercury or quicksilver as a means of strengthening the system. Mercury is called *pārada*, because it is a means of conveyance beyond the series of transmigratory states. Thus it has been said—

> "It gives the farther shore of metempsychosis: it is called *pārada*."

And again in the Rasārṇava—

> "It is styled *pārada* because it is employed for the highest end by
> the best votaries.
>
> "Since this in sleep identical with me, goddess, arises from my
> members, and is the exudation of my body, it is called *rasa*."

It may be urged that the literal interpretation of these words is incorrect, the liberation in this life being explicable in another manner. This objection is not allowable, liberation being set out in the six systems as subsequent to the death of the body, and upon this there can be no reliance, and consequently no activity to attain to it free from misgivings. This is also laid down in the same treatise[](#page-138 "Click to link Page 138")—

> "Liberation is declared in the six systems to follow the death of the
> body.
>
> "Such liberation is not cognised in perception like an emblic
> myrobalan fruit in the hand.
>
> "Therefore a man should preserve that body by means of mercury and of
> medicaments."

Govinda-bhagavat also says—

> "Holding that the enjoyments of wealth and of the body are not
> permanent, one should strive
>
> "After emancipation; but emancipation results from knowledge,
> knowledge from study, and study is only possible in a healthy body."

The body, some one may say, is seen to be perishable, how can its permanency be effected? Think not so, it is replied, for though the body, as a complexus of six sheaths or wrappers of the soul, is dissoluble, yet the body, as created by Hara and Gaurī under the names of mercury and mica, may be perdurable. Thus it is said in the Rasahṛdaya—

> "They who, without quitting the body, have attained to a new body, the
> creation of Hara and Gaurī,
>
> "They are to be lauded, perfected by mercury, at whose service is the
> aggregate of magic texts."

The ascetic, therefore, who aspires to liberation in this life should first make to himself a glorified body. And inasmuch as mercury is produced by the creative conjunction of Hara and Gaurī, and mica is produced from Gaurī, mercury and mica are severally identified with Hara and Gaurī in the verse—

> "Mica is thy seed, and mercury is my seed;
>
> "The combination of the two, O goddess, is destructive of death and
> poverty."

This is very little to say about the matter. In the Raseśvara-siddhānta many among the gods, the Daityas, the Munis, and mankind, are declared to have attained to liberation in this life by acquiring a divine body through the efficacy of quicksilver.[](#page-139 "Click to link Page 139")

> "Certain of the gods, Maheśa and others; certain Daityas, Śukra and
> others;
>
> "Certain Munis, the Bālakhilyas and others; certain kings, Someśvara
> and others;
>
> "Govinda-bhagavat, Govinda-nāyaka,
>
> "Charvaṭi, Kapila, Vyāli, Kāpāli, Kandalāyana,
>
> "These and many others proceed perfected, liberated while alive,
>
> "Having attained to a mercurial body, and therewith identified."

The meaning of this, as explicated by Parameśvara to Parameśvarī, is as follows:—

> "By the method of works is attained, O supreme of goddesses, the
> preservation of the body;
>
> "And the method of works is said to be twofold, mercury and air,
>
> "Mercury and air swooning carry off diseases, dead they restore to
> life,
>
> "Bound they give the power of flying about."

The swooning state of mercury is thus described—

> "They say quicksilver to be swooning when it is perceived, as
> characterised thus—
>
> "Of various colours, and free from excessive volatility.
>
> "A man should regard that quicksilver as dead, in which the following
> marks are seen—
>
> "Wetness, thickness, brightness, heaviness, mobility."

The bound condition is described in another place as follows:—

> "The character of bound quicksilver is that it is—
>
> "Continuous, fluent, luminous, pure, heavy, and that it parts asunder
> under friction."

Some one may urge: If the creation of mercury by Hara and Gaurī were proved, it might be allowed that the body could be made permanent; but how can that be proved? The objection is not allowable, inasmuch as that *can* be proved by the eighteen modes of elaboration. Thus it is stated by the authorities[](#page-140 "Click to link Page 140")—

> "Eighteen modes of elaboration are to be carefully discriminated,
>
> "In the first place, as pure in every process, for perfecting the
> adepts."

And these modes of elaboration are enumerated thus—

> "Sweating, rubbing, swooning, fixing, dropping, coercion, restraining,
>
> "Kindling, going, falling into globules, pulverising, covering,
>
> "Internal flux, external flux, burning, colouring, and pouring,
>
> "And eating it by parting and piercing it,—are the eighteen modes of
> treating quicksilver."

These treatments have been described at length by Govinda-bhagavat, Sarvajña-rāmeśvara and the other ancient authorities, and are here omitted to avoid prolixity.

The mercurial system is not to be looked upon as merely eulogistic of the metal, it being immediately, through the conservation of the body, a means to the highest end, liberation. Thus it is said in the Rasārṇava—

"Declare to me, O god, that supremely efficacious destruction of the blood, that destruction of the body, imparted by thee, whereby it attained the power of flying about in the sky. Goddess (he replied), quicksilver is to be applied both to the blood and to the body. This makes the appearance of body and blood alike. A man should first try it upon the blood, and then apply it to the body."

It will be asked: Why should we make this effort to acquire a celestial body, seeing that liberation is effected by the self-manifestation of the supreme principle, existence, intelligence, and beatitude? We reply: This is no objection, such liberation being inaccessible unless we acquire a healthy body. Thus it is said in the Rasahṛdaya—

[](#page-141 "Click to link Page 141")In another place we read—

> "The adoration of the sacred quicksilver is more beatific than the
> worship of all the phallic emblems at Kāśi and elsewhere,
>
> "Inasmuch as there is attained thereby enjoyment, health, exemption
> from decay, and immortality."

The sin of disparaging mercury is also set out—

> "The adept on hearing quicksilver heedlessly disparaged should recall
> quicksilver to mind.
>
> "He should at once shun the blasphemer, who is by his blasphemy for
> ever filled with sin."

The attainment, then, of the highest end of the personal soul takes place by an intuition of the highest principle by means of the practice of union (ἕνωσις after the acquisition of a divine body in the manner we have described. Thereafter—

> "The light of pure intelligence shines forth unto certain men of holy
> vision,
>
> "Which, seated between the two eyebrows, illumines the universe, like
> fire, or lightning, or the sun:
>
> "Perfect beatitude, unalloyed, absolute, the essence whereof is
> luminousness, undifferenced,
>
> "From which all troubles are fallen away, knowable, tranquil,
> self-recognised:
>
> "Fixing the internal organ upon that, seeing the whole universe
> manifested, made of pure intelligence,
>
> "The aspirant even in this life attains to the absolute, his bondage
> to works annulled."

A Vedic text also declares: That is Rasa (mercury), having obtained this he becomes beatitude.

Thus, then, it has been shown that mercury alone is the means of passing beyond the burden of transmigratory pains. And conformably we have a verse which sets forth the identity between mercury and the supreme self—

> "May that mercury, which is the very self, preserve us from dejection
> and from the terrors of
> metempsychosis,[](#page-144 "Click to link Page 144")
>
> "Which is naturally to be applied again and again by those that aspire
> to liberation from the enveloping illusion,
>
> "Which perfected endures, which plays not again when the soul awakes,
>
> "Which, when it arises, pains no other soul, which shines forth by
> itself from itself."

A. E. G.
