+++
title = "19 Bibliography"
+++
## TRÜBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES.

"A knowledge of the commonplace, at least, of Oriental literature, philosophy, and religion is as necessary to the general reader of the present day as an acquaintance with the Latin and Greek classics was a generation or so ago. Immense strides have been made within the present century in these branches of learning; Sanskrit has been brought within the range of accurate philology, and its invaluable ancient literature thoroughly investigated; the language and sacred books of the Zoroastrians have been laid bare; Egyptian, Assyrian, and other records of the remote past have been deciphered, and a group of scholars speak of still more recondite Accadian and Hittite monuments; but the results of all the scholarship that has been devoted to these subjects have been almost inaccessible to the public because they were contained for the most part in learned or expensive works, or scattered throughout the numbers of scientific periodicals. Messrs. Trübner & Co., in a spirit of enterprise which does them infinite credit, have determined to supply the constantly-increasing want, and to give in a popular, or, at least, a comprehensive form, all this mass of knowledge to the world."—*Times.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Second Edition, post 8vo, pp. xxxii.-748, with Map, cloth, price 21s.

### THE INDIAN EMPIRE: ITS PEOPLE, HISTORY, AND PRODUCTS.

By the Hon. Sir W. W. Hunter, K.C.S.I., C.S.I., C.I.E., LL.D.,

Member of the Viceroy's Legislative Council,

Director-General of Statistics to the Government of India.

Being a Revised Edition, brought up to date, and incorporating the general results of the Census of 1881.

> "It forms a volume of more than 700 pages, and is a marvellous
> combination of literary condensation and research. It gives a complete
> account of the Indian Empire, its history, peoples, and products, and
> forms the worthy outcome of seventeen years of labour with exceptional
> opportunities for rendering that labour fruitful. Nothing could be
> more lucid than Sir William Hunter's expositions of the economic and
> political condition of India at the present time, or more interesting
> than his scholarly history of the India of the past."—*The Times.*

*THE FOLLOWING WORKS HAVE ALREADY APPEARED*:—

Third Edition, post 8vo, cloth, pp. xvi.-428, price 16s.

### ESSAYS ON THE SACRED LANGUAGE, WRITINGS, AND RELIGION OF THE PARSIS.

By Martin Haug, Ph.D.,

Late of the Universities of Tübingen, Göttingen, and Bonn; Superintendent of Sanskrit Studies, and Professor of Sanskrit in the Poona College.

Edited and Enlarged by Dr. E. W. West.

To which is added a Biographical Memoir of the late Dr. Haug by Prof. E. P. Evans.

I. History of the Researches into the Sacred Writings and Religion of the Parsis, from the Earliest Times down to the Present.

II\. Languages of the Parsi Scriptures.

III\. The Zend-Avesta, or the Scripture of the Parsis.

IV\. The Zoroastrian Religion, as to its Origin and Development.

> "'Essays on the Sacred Language, Writings, and Religion of the
> Parsis,' by the late Dr. Martin Haug, edited by Dr. E. W. West. The
> author intended, on his return from India, to expand the materials
> contained in this work into a comprehensive account of the Zoroastrian
> religion, but the design was frustrated by his untimely death. We
> have, however, in a concise and readable form, a history of the
> researches into the sacred writings and religion of the Parsis from
> the earliest times down to the present—a dissertation on the languages
> of the Parsi Scriptures, a translation of the Zend-Avesta, or the
> Scripture of the Parsis, and a dissertation on the Zoroastrian
> religion, with especial reference to its origin and
> development."—*Times.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, cloth, pp. viii.-176, price 7s. 6d.

### TEXTS FROM THE BUDDHIST CANON

COMMONLY KNOWN AS "DHAMMAPADA."

*With Accompanying Narratives.*

Translated from the Chinese by S. BEAL, B.A., Professor of Chinese, University College, London.

The Dhammapada, as hitherto known by the Pali Text Edition, as edited by Fausböll, by Max Müller's English, and Albrecht Weber's German translations, consists only of twenty-six chapters or sections, whilst the Chinese version, or rather recension, as now translated by Mr. Beal, consists of thirty-nine sections. The students of Pali who possess Fausböll's text, or either of the above-named translations, will therefore needs want Mr. Beal's English rendering of the Chinese version; the thirteen above-named additional sections not being accessible to them in any other form; for, even if they understand Chinese, the Chinese original would be unobtainable by them.

> "Mr. Beal's rendering of the Chinese translation is a most valuable
> aid to the critical study of the work. It contains authentic texts
> gathered from ancient canonical books, and generally connected with
> some incident in the history of Buddha. Their great interest, however,
> consists in the light which they throw upon everyday life in India at
> the remote period at which they were written, and upon the method of
> teaching adopted by the founder of the religion. The method employed
> was principally parable, and the simplicity of the tales and the
> excellence of the morals inculcated, as well as the strange hold which
> they have retained upon the minds of millions of people, make them a
> very remarkable study."—*Times.*
>
> "Mr. Beal, by making it accessible in an English dress, has added to
> the great services he has already rendered to the comparative study of
> religious history."—*Academy.*
>
> "Valuable as exhibiting the doctrine of the Buddhists in its purest,
> least adulterated form, it brings the modern reader face to face with
> that simple creed and rule of conduct which won its way over the minds
> of myriads, and which is now nominally professed by 145 millions, who
> have overlaid its austere simplicity with innumerable ceremonies,
> forgotten its maxims, perverted its teaching, and so inverted its
> leading principle that a religion whose founder denied a God, now
> worships that founder as a god himself."—*Scotsman.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Second Edition, post 8vo, cloth, pp. xxiv.-360, price 10s. 6d.

### THE HISTORY OF INDIAN LITERATURE.

By Albrecht Weber.

Translated from the Second German Edition by John Mann, M.A., and Théodor Zacariae, Ph.D., with the sanction of the Author.

> Dr. Buhler, Inspector of Schools in India, writes:—"When I was
> Professor of Oriental Languages in Elphinstone College, I frequently
> felt the want of such a work to which I could refer the students."
>
> Professor Cowell, of Cambridge, writes:—"It will be especially useful
> to the students in our Indian colleges and universities. I used to
> long for such a book when I was teaching in Calcutta. Hindu students
> are intensely interested in the history of Sanskrit literature, and
> this volume will supply them with all they want on the subject."
>
> Professor Whitney, Yale College, New Haven, Conn., U.S.A., writes:—"I
> was one of the class to whom the work was originally given in the form
> of academic lectures. At their first appearance they were by far the
> most learned and able treatment of their subject; and with their
> recent additions they still maintain decidedly the same rank."

> "Is perhaps the most comprehensive and lucid survey of Sanskrit
> literature extant. The essays contained in the volume were originally
> delivered as academic lectures, and at the time of their first
> publication were acknowledged to be by far the most learned and able
> treatment of the subject. They have now been brought up to date by the
> addition of all the most important results of recent
> research."—*Times.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, cloth, pp. xii.-198, accompanied by Two Language Maps, price 7s. 6d.

### A SKETCH OF THE MODERN LANGUAGES OF THE EAST INDIES.

By Robert N. Cust.

The Author has attempted to fill up a vacuum, the inconvenience of which pressed itself on his notice. Much had been written about the languages of the East Indies, but the extent of our present knowledge had not even been brought to a focus. It occurred to him that it might be of use to others to publish in an arranged form the notes which he had collected for his own edification.

> "Supplies a deficiency which has long been felt."—*Times.*
>
> "The book before us is then a valuable contribution to philological
> science. It passes under review a vast number of languages, and it
> gives, or professes to give, in every case the sum and substance of
> the opinions and judgments of the best-informed writers."—*Saturday
> Review.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Second Corrected Edition, post 8vo, pp. xii.-116, cloth, price 5s.

### THE BIRTH OF THE WAR-GOD.

A Poem. By Kalidasa.

Translated from the Sanskrit into English Verse by  
Ralph T. H. Griffith, M.A.

> "A very spirited rendering of the *Kumārasambhava*, which was first
> published twenty-six years ago, and which we are glad to see made once
> more accessible."—*Times.*
>
> "Mr. Griffith's very spirited rendering is well known to most who are
> at all interested in Indian literature, or enjoy the tenderness of
> feeling and rich creative imagination of its author."—*Indian
> Antiquary.*
>
> "We are very glad to welcome a second edition of Professor Griffith's
> admirable translation. Few translations deserve a second edition
> better."—*Athenæum.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. 432, cloth, price 16s.

### A CLASSICAL DICTIONARY OF HINDU MYTHOLOGY AND RELIGION, GEOGRAPHY, HISTORY, AND LITERATURE.

By John Dowson, M.R.A.S.,  
Late Professor of Hindustani, Staff College.

> "This not only forms an indispensable book of reference to students of
> Indian literature, but is also of great general interest, as it gives
> in a concise and easily accessible form all that need be known about
> the personages of Hindu mythology whose names are so familiar, but of
> whom so little is known outside the limited circle of
> *savants*."—*Times.*
>
> "It is no slight gain when such subjects are treated fairly and fully
> in a moderate space; and we need only add that the few wants which we
> may hope to see supplied in new editions detract but little from the
> general excellence of Mr. Dowson's work."—*Saturday Review.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, with View of Mecca, pp. cxii.-172, cloth, price 9s.

### SELECTIONS FROM THE KORAN.

By Edward William Lane,

Translator of "The Thousand and One Nights;" &c., &c.

A New Edition, Revised and Enlarged, with an Introduction by  
Stanley Lane Poole.

> "... Has been long esteemed in this country as the compilation of one
> of the greatest Arabic scholars of the time, the late Mr. Lane, the
> well-known translator of the 'Arabian Nights.'... The present editor
> has enhanced the value of his relative's work by divesting the text of
> a great deal of extraneous matter introduced by way of comment, and
> prefixing an introduction."—*Times.*
>
> "Mr. Poole is both a generous and a learned biographer.... Mr. Poole
> tells us the facts ... so far as it is possible for industry and
> criticism to ascertain them, and for literary skill to present them in
> a condensed and readable form."—*Englishman, Calcutta.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. vi.-368, cloth, price 14s.

### MODERN INDIA AND THE INDIANS,

BEING A SERIES OF IMPRESSIONS, NOTES, AND ESSAYS.

By Monier Williams, D.C.L.,

Hon. LL.D. of the University of Calcutta, Hon. Member of the Bombay Asiatic Society,  
Boden Professor of Sanskrit in the University of Oxford.

Third Edition, revised and augmented by considerable Additions,  
with Illustrations and a Map.

> "In this volume we have the thoughtful impressions of a thoughtful man
> on some of the most important questions connected with our Indian
> Empire.... An enlightened observant man, travelling among an
> enlightened observant people, Professor Monier Williams has brought
> before the public in a pleasant form more of the manners and customs
> of the Queen's Indian subjects than we ever remember to have seen in
> any one work. He not only deserves the thanks of every Englishman for
> this able contribution to the study of Modern India—a subject with
> which we should be specially familiar—but he deserves the thanks of
> every Indian, Parsee or Hindu, Buddhist and Moslem, for his clear
> exposition of their manners, their creeds, and their
> necessities."—*Times.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xliv.-376, cloth, price 14s.

### METRICAL TRANSLATIONS FROM SANSKRIT WRITERS.

With an Introduction, many Prose Versions, and Parallel Passages from  
Classical Authors.

By J. Muir, C.I.E., D.C.L., LL.D., Ph.D.

> "... An agreeable introduction to Hindu poetry."—*Times.*
>
> "... A volume which may be taken as a fair illustration alike of the
> religions and moral sentiments and of the legendary lore of the best
> Sanskrit writers."—*Edinburgh Daily Review.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Second Edition, post 8vo, pp. xxvi.-244, cloth, price 10s. 6d.

### THE GULISTAN;

Or, Rose Garden of Shekh Mushliu'd-din Sadi of Shiraz.

Translated for the First Time into Prose and Verse, with an  
Introductory Preface, and a Life of the Author, from the Atish Kadah,

By Edward B. Eastwick, C.B., M.A., F.R.S., M.R.A.S.

> "It is a very fair rendering of the original."—*Times.*
>
> "The new edition has long been desired, and will be welcomed by all
> who take any interest in Oriental poetry. The *Gulistan* is a typical
> Persian verse-book of the highest order. Mr. Eastwick's rhymed
> translation ... has long established itself in a secure position as
> the best version of Sadi's finest work."—*Academy.*
>
> "It is both faithfully and gracefully executed."—*Tablet.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In Two Volumes, post 8vo, pp. viii.-408 and viii.-348, cloth, price 28s.

### MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS RELATING TO INDIAN SUBJECTS.

By Brian Houghton Hodgson, Esq., F.R.S.,

Late of the Bengal Civil Service; Corresponding Member of the Institute;  
Chevalier of the Legion of Honour; late British Minister at the Court of Nepal, &c., &c.

*CONTENTS OF VOL. I.*

Section I.—On the Kocch, Bódó, and Dhimāl Tribes.—Part I. Vocabulary.—Part II. Grammar.—Part III. Their Origin, Location, Numbers, Creed, Customs, Character, and Condition, with a General Description of the Climate they dwell in—Appendix.

Section II.—On Himalayan Ethnology.—I. Comparative Vocabulary of the Languages of the Broken Tribes of Népāl.—II. Vocabulary of the Dialects of the Kiranti Language.—III. Grammatical Analysis of the Vāyu Language. The Vāyu Grammar.—IV. Analysis of the Bāhing Dialect of the Kiranti language. The Bāhing Grammar.—V. On the Vāyu or Hāyu Tribe of the Central Himalāya.—VI. On the Kiranti Tribe of the Central Himalāya.

*CONTENTS OF VOL. II.*

Section III.—On the Aborigines of North-Eastern India. Comparative Vocabulary of the Tibetan, Bódó, and Gāró Tongues.

Section IV.—Aborigines of the North-Eastern Frontier.

Section V.—Aborigines of the Eastern Frontier.

Section VI.—The Indo-Chinese Borderers, and their connection with the Himalayans and Tibetans. Comparative Vocabulary of Indo-Chinese Borderers in Arakan. Comparative Vocabulary of Indo-Chinese Borderers in Tenasserim.

Section VII.—The Mongolian Affinities of the Caucasians.—Comparison and Analysis of Caucasian and Mongolian Words.

Section VIII.—Physical Type of Tibetans.

Section IX.—The Aborigines of Central India.—Comparative Vocabulary of the Aboriginal Languages of Central India.—Aborigines of the Eastern Ghats.—Vocabulary of some of the Dialects of the Hill and Wandering Tribes in the Northern Sircars.—Aborigines of the Nilgiris, with Remarks on their Affinities.—Supplement to the Nilgirian Vocabularies.—The Aborigines of Southern India and Ceylon.

Section X.—Route of Nepalese Mission to Pekin, with Remarks on the Water-Shed and Plateau of Tibet.

Section XI.—Route from Kāthmāndū, the Capital of Nepâl, to Darjeeling in Sikim.—Memorandum relative to the Seven Cosis of Nepâl.

Section XII.—Some Accounts of the Systems of Law and Police as recognised in the State of Nepâl.

Section XIII.—The Native Method of making the Paper denominated Hindustan, Népālese.

Section XIV.—Pre-eminence of the Vernaculars; or, the Anglicists Answered; Being Letters on the Education of the People of India.

"For the study of the less-known races of India Mr. Brian Hodgson's 'Miscellaneous Essays' will be found very valuable both to the philologist and the ethnologist."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Third Edition, Two Vols., post 8vo, pp. viii.-268 and viii.-326, cloth, price 21s.

### THE LIFE OR LEGEND OF GAUDAMA,

THE BUDDHA OF THE BURMESE. With Annotations.

The Ways to Neibban, and Notice on the Phongyies or Burmese Monks.

By the Right Rev. P. Bigandet,

Bishop of Ramatha, Vicar-Apostolic of Ava and Pegu.

> "The work is furnished with copious notes, which not only illustrate
> the subject-matter, but form a perfect encyclopædia of Buddhist
> lore."—*Times.*
>
> "A work which will furnish European students of Buddhism with a most
> valuable help in the prosecution of their investigations."—*Edinburgh
> Daily Review.*
>
> "Bishop Bigandet's invaluable work."—*Indian Antiquary.*
>
> "Viewed in this light, its importance is sufficient to place students
> of the subject under a deep obligation to its author."—*Calcutta
> Review.*
>
> "This work is one of the greatest authorities upon Buddhism."—*Dublin
> Review.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xxiv.-420, cloth, price 18s.

### CHINESE BUDDHISM.

A VOLUME OF SKETCHES, HISTORICAL AND CRITICAL.

By J. Edkins, D.D.

Author of "China's Place in Philology," "Religion in China," &c., &c.

> "It contains a vast deal of important information on the subject, such
> as is only to be gained by long-continued study on the
> spot."—*Athenæum.*
>
> "Upon the whole, we know of no work comparable to it for the extent of
> its original research, and the simplicity with which this complicated
> system of philosophy, religion, literature, and ritual is set
> forth."—*British Quarterly Review.*
>
> "The whole volume is replete with learning.... It deserves most
> careful study from all interested in the history of the religions of
> the world, and expressly of those who are concerned in the propagation
> of Christianity. Dr. Edkins notices in terms of just condemnation the
> exaggerated praise bestowed upon Buddhism by recent English
> writers."—*Record.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. 496, cloth, price 10s. 6d.

### LINGUISTIC AND ORIENTAL ESSAYS.

Written from the Year 1846 to 1878.

By Robert Needham Cust,

Late Member of Her Majesty's Indian Civil Service;  
Hon. Secretary to the Royal Asiatic Society; and  
Author of "The Modern Languages of the East Indies."

> "We know none who has described Indian life, especially the life of
> the natives, with so much learning, sympathy, and literary
> talent."—*Academy.*
>
> "They seem to us to be full of suggestive and original remarks."—*St.
> James's Gazette.*
>
> "His book contains a vast amount of information. The result of
> thirty-five years of inquiry, reflection, and speculation, and that on
> subjects as full of fascination as of food for thought."—*Tablet.*
>
> "Exhibit such a thorough acquaintance with the history and antiquities
> of India as to entitle him to speak as one having
> authority."—*Edinburgh Daily Review.*
>
> "The author speaks with the authority of personal experience.... It is
> this constant association with the country and the people which gives
> such a vividness to many of the pages."—*Athenæum.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. civ.-348, cloth, price 18s.

### BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES; or, Jataka Tales.

The Oldest Collection of Folk-lore Extant:

BEING THE JATAKATTHAVANNANA,

For the first time Edited in the original Pāli.

By V. Fausboll;

And Translated by T. W. Rhys Davids.

Translation. Volume I.

> "These are tales supposed to have been told by the Buddha of what he
> had seen and heard in his previous births. They are probably the
> nearest representatives of the original Aryan stories from which
> sprang the folk-lore of Europe as well as India. The introduction
> contains a most interesting disquisition on the migrations of these
> fables, tracing their reappearance in the various groups of folk-lore
> legends. Among other old friends, we meet with a version of the
> Judgment of Solomon."—*Times.*
>
> "It is now some years since Mr. Rhys Davids asserted his right to be
> heard on this subject by his able article on Buddhism in the new
> edition of the 'Encyclopædia Britannica.'"—*Leeds Mercury.*
>
> "All who are interested in Buddhist literature ought to feel deeply
> indebted to Mr. Rhys Davids. His well-established reputation as a Pali
> scholar is a sufficient guarantee for the fidelity of his version, and
> the style of his translations is deserving of high praise."—*Academy.*
>
> "No more competent expositor of Buddhism could be found than Mr. Rhys
> Davids. In the Jātaka book we have, then, a priceless record of the
> earliest imaginative literature of our race; and ... it presents to us
> a nearly complete picture of the social life and customs and popular
> beliefs of the common people of Aryan tribes, closely related to
> ourselves, just as they were passing through the first stages of
> civilisation."—*St. James's Gazette.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xxviii.-362, cloth, price 14s.

### A TALMUDIC MISCELLANY;

Or, A THOUSAND AND ONE EXTRACTS FROM THE TALMUD, THE MIDRASHIM, AND THE KABBALAH.

Compiled and Translated by PAUL ISAAC HERSHON, Author of "Genesis According to the Talmud," &c.

With Notes and Copious Indexes.

> "To obtain in so concise and handy a form as this volume a general
> idea of the Talmud is a boon to Christians at least."—*Times.*
>
> "Its peculiar and popular character will make it attractive to general
> readers. Mr. Hershon is a very competent scholar.... Contains samples
> of the good, bad, and indifferent, and especially extracts that throw
> light upon the Scriptures."—*British Quarterly Review.*
>
> "Will convey to English readers a more complete and truthful notion of
> the Talmud than any other work that has yet appeared."—*Daily News.*
>
> "Without overlooking in the slightest the several attractions of the
> previous volumes of the 'Oriental Series.' we have no hesitation in
> saying that this surpasses them all in interest."—*Edinburgh Daily
> Review.*
>
> "Mr. Hershon has ... thus given English readers what is, we believe, a
> fair set of specimens which they can test for themselves."—*The
> Record.*
>
> "This book is by far the best fitted in the present state of knowledge
> to enable the general reader to gain a fair and unbiased conception of
> the multifarious contents of the wonderful miscellany which can only
> be truly understood—so Jewish pride asserts—by the life-long devotion
> of scholars of the Chosen People."—*Inquirer.*
>
> "The value and importance of this volume consist in the fact that
> scarcely a single extract is given in its pages but throws some light,
> direct or refracted, upon those Scriptures which are the common
> heritage of Jew and Christian alike."—*John Bull.*
>
> "It is a capital specimen of Hebrew scholarship; a monument of
> learned, loving, light-giving labour."—*Jewish Herald.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xii.-228, cloth, price 7s. 6d.

### THE CLASSICAL POETRY OF THE JAPANESE.

By Basil Hall Chamberlain, Author of "Yeigo Heñkaku Shirañ."

> "A very curious volume. The author has manifestly devoted much labour
> to the task of studying the poetical literature of the Japanese, and
> rendering characteristic specimens into English verse."—*Daily News.*
>
> "Mr. Chamberlain's volume is, so far as we are aware, the first
> attempt which has been made to interpret the literature of the
> Japanese to the Western world. It is to the classical poetry of Old
> Japan that we must turn for indigenous Japanese thought, and in the
> volume before us we have a selection from that poetry rendered into
> graceful English verse."—*Tablet.*
>
> "It is undoubtedly one of the best translations of lyric literature
> which has appeared during the close of the last year."—*Celestial
> Empire.*
>
> "Mr. Chamberlain set himself a difficult task when he undertook to
> reproduce Japanese poetry in an English form. But he has evidently
> laboured *con amore*, and his efforts are successful to a
> degree."—*London and China Express.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xii.-164, cloth, price 10s. 6d.

### THE HISTORY OF ESARHADDON (Son of Sennacherib),

KING OF ASSYRIA, b.c. 681-668.

Translated from the Cuneiform Inscriptions upon Cylinders and Tablets in the British Museum Collection; together with a Grammatical Analysis of each Word, Explanations of the Ideographs by Extracts from the Bi-Lingual Syllabaries, and List of Eponyms, &c.

By Ernest A. Budge, B.A., M.R.A.S., Assyrian Exhibitioner, Christ's College, Cambridge.

> "Students of scriptural archæology will also appreciate the 'History
> of Esarhaddon.'"—*Times.*
>
> "There is much to attract the scholar in this volume. It does not
> pretend to popularise studies which are yet in their infancy. Its
> primary object is to translate, but it does not assume to be more than
> tentative, and it offers both to the professed Assyriologist and to
> the ordinary non-Assyriological Semitic scholar the means of
> controlling its results."—*Academy.*
>
> "Mr. Budge's book is, of course, mainly addressed to Assyrian scholars
> and students. They are not, it is to be feared, a very numerous class.
> But the more thanks are due to him on that account for the way in
> which he has acquitted himself in his laborious task."—*Tablet.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. 448, cloth, price 21s.

### THE MESNEVI

(Usually known as The Mesneviyi Sherif, or Holy Mesnevi) OF MEVLANA (OUR LORD) JELALU 'D-DIN MUHAMMED ER-RUMI.

Book the First.

*Together with some Account of the Life and Acts of the Author, of his Ancestors, and of his Descendants.*

Illustrated by a Selection of Characteristic Anecdotes, as Collected by their Historian,

Mevlana Shemsu-'D-Din Ahmed, el Eflaki, el 'Arifi.

Translated, and the Poetry Versified, in English,

By James W. Redhouse, M.R.A.S., &c.

> "A complete treasury of occult Oriental lore."—*Saturday Review.*
>
> "This book will be a very valuable help to the reader ignorant of
> Persia, who is desirous of obtaining an insight into a very important
> department of the literature extant in that language."—*Tablet.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xvi.-280, cloth, price 6s.

### EASTERN PROVERBS AND EMBLEMS

Illustrating Old Truths.

By Rev. J. Long,

Member of the Bengal Asiatic Society, F.R.G.S.

> "We regard the book as valuable, and wish for it a wide circulation
> and attentive reading."—*Record.*
>
> "Altogether, it is quite a feast of good things."—*Globe.*
>
> "It is full of interesting matter."—*Antiquary.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. viii.-270, cloth, price 7s. 6d.

### INDIAN POETRY;

Containing a New Edition of the "Indian Song of Songs," from the Sanscrit of the "Gita Govinda" of Jayadeva; Two Books from "The Iliad of India" (Mahabharata), "Proverbial Wisdom" from the Shlokas of the Hitopadesa, and other Oriental Poems.

By Edwin Arnold, C.S.I., Author of "The Light of Asia."

> "In this new volume of Messrs. Trübner's Oriental Series, Mr. Edwin
> Arnold does good service by illustrating, through the medium of his
> musical English melodies, the power of Indian poetry to stir European
> emotions. The 'Indian Song of Songs' is not unknown to scholars. Mr.
> Arnold will have introduced it among popular English poems. Nothing
> could be more graceful and delicate than the shades by which Krishna
> is portrayed in the gradual process of being weaned by the love of

'Beautiful Radha, jasmine-bosomed Radha,'

> from the allurements of the forest nymphs, in whom the five senses are
> typified."—*Times.*
>
> "No other English poet has ever thrown his genius and his art so
> thoroughly into the work of translating Eastern ideas as Mr. Arnold
> has done in his splendid paraphrases of language contained in these
> mighty epics."—*Daily Telegraph.*
>
> "The poem abounds with imagery of Eastern luxuriousness and
> sensuousness; the air seems laden with the spicy odours of the
> tropics, and the verse has a richness and a melody sufficient to
> captivate the senses of the dullest."—*Standard.*
>
> "The translator, while producing a very enjoyable poem, has adhered
> with tolerable fidelity to the original text."—*Overland Mail.*
>
> "We certainly wish Mr. Arnold success in his attempt 'to popularise
> Indian classics,' that being, as his preface tells us, the goal
> towards which he bends his efforts."—*Allen's Indian Mail.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xvi.-296, cloth, price 10s. 6d.

### THE MIND OF MENCIUS;

Or, POLITICAL ECONOMY FOUNDED UPON MORAL PHILOSOPHY.

A Systematic Digest of the Doctrines of the Chinese Philosopher Mencius.

Translated from the Original Text and Classified, with Comments and Explanations,

By the Rev. Ernst Faber, Rhenish Mission Society.

Translated from the German, with Additional Notes,

By the Rev. A. B. Hutchinson, C.M.S., Church Mission, Hong Kong.

> "Mr. Faber is already well known in the field of Chinese studies by
> his digest of the doctrines of Confucius. The value of this work will
> be perceived when it is remembered that at no time since relations
> commenced between China and the West has the former been so
> powerful—we had almost said aggressive—as now. For those who will give
> it careful study, Mr. Faber's work is one of the most valuable of the
> excellent series to which it belongs."—*Nature.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. 336, cloth, price 16s.

### THE RELIGIONS OF INDIA.

By A. Barth.

Translated from the French with the authority and assistance of the Author.

The author has, at the request of the publishers, considerably enlarged the work for the translator, and has added the literature of the subject to date; the translation may, therefore, be looked upon as an equivalent of a new and improved edition of the original.

> "Is not only a valuable manual of the religions of India, which marks
> a distinct step in the treatment of the subject, but also a useful
> work of reference."—*Academy.*
>
> "This volume is a reproduction, with corrections and additions, of an
> article contributed by the learned author two years ago to the
> 'Encyclopédie des Sciences Religieuses.' It attracted much notice when
> it first appeared, and is generally admitted to present the best
> summary extant of the vast subject with which it deals."—*Tablet.*
>
> "This is not only on the whole the best but the only manual of the
> religions of India, apart from Buddhism, which we have in English. The
> present work ... shows not only great knowledge of the facts and power
> of clear exposition, but also great insight into the inner history and
> the deeper meaning of the great religion, for it is in reality only
> one, which it proposes to describe."—*Modern Review.*
>
> "The merit of the work has been emphatically recognised by the most
> authoritative Orientalists, both in this country and on the continent
> of Europe. But probably there are few Indianists (if we may use the
> word) who would not derive a good deal of information from it, and
> especially from the extensive bibliography provided in the
> notes."—*Dublin Review.*
>
> "Such a sketch M. Barth has drawn with a master-hand."—*Critic (New
> York).*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. viii.-152, cloth, price 6s.

### HINDU PHILOSOPHY.

The SĀnkhya KĀrika Of Is'wara Krishna.

An Exposition of the System of Kapila, with an Appendix on the Nyāya and Vais'eshika Systems.

By John Davies, M.A. (Cantab.), M.R.A.S.

The system of Kapila contains nearly all that India has produced in the department of pure philosophy.

> "The non-Orientalist ... finds in Mr. Davies a patient and learned
> guide who leads him into the intricacies of the philosophy of India,
> and supplies him with a clue, that he may not be lost in them. In the
> preface he states that the system of Kapila is the 'earliest attempt
> on record to give an answer, from reason alone, to the mysterious
> questions which arise in every thoughtful mind about the origin of the
> world, the nature and relations of man and his future destiny,' and in
> his learned and able notes he exhibits 'the connection of the Sānkhya
> system with the philosophy of Spinoza,' and 'the connection of the
> system of Kapila with that of Schopenhauer and Von
> Hartmann.'"—*Foreign Church Chronicle.*
>
> "Mr. Davies's volume on Hindu Philosophy is an undoubted gain to all
> students of the development of thought. The system of Kapila, which is
> here given in a translation from the Sānkhya Kārikā, is the only
> contribution of India to pure philosophy.... Presents many points of
> deep interest to the student of comparative philosophy, and without
> Mr. Davies's lucid interpretation it would be difficult to appreciate
> these points in any adequate manner."—*Saturday Review.*
>
> "We welcome Mr. Davies's book as a valuable addition to our
> philosophical library."—*Notes and Queries.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Second Edition. Post 8vo, pp. x.-130, cloth, price 6s.

### A MANUAL OF HINDU PANTHEISM. VEDÂNTASÂRA.

Translated, with copious Annotations,

By Major G. A. Jacob,

Bombay Staff Corps; Inspector of Army Schools.

The design of this little work is to provide for missionaries, and for others who, like them, have little leisure for original research, an accurate summary of the doctrines of the Vedânta.

> "The modest title of Major Jacob's work conveys but an inadequate idea
> of the vast amount of research embodied in his notes to the text of
> the Vedantasara. So copious, indeed, are these, and so much collateral
> matter do they bring to bear on the subject, that the diligent student
> will rise from their perusal with a fairly adequate view of Hindû
> philosophy generally. His work ... is one of the best of its kind that
> we have seen."—*Calcutta Review.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xii.-154, cloth, price 7s. 6d.

### TSUNI—\|\|GOAM:

The Supreme Being of the Khoi-Khoi.

By THEOPHILUS HAHN, Ph.D.,

Custodian of the Grey Collection, Cape Town; Corresponding Member of the Geogr. Society, Dresden; Corresponding Member of the Anthropological Society, Vienna, &c., &c.

> "The first instalment of Dr. Hahn's labours will be of interest, not
> at the Cape only, but in every University of Europe. It is, in fact, a
> most valuable contribution to the comparative study of religion and
> mythology. Accounts of their religion and mythology were scattered
> about in various books; these have been carefully collected by Dr.
> Hahn and printed in his second chapter, enriched and improved by what
> he has been able to collect himself."—*Prof. Max Müller in the
> Nineteenth Century.*
>
> "It is full of good things."—*St. James's Gazette.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In Four Volumes. Post 8vo, Vol. I., pp. xii.-392, cloth, price 12s. 6d., Vol. II., pp. vi.-408, cloth, price 12s. 6d.,  
Vol. III., pp. viii.-414, cloth, price 12s. 6d., Vol. IV., pp. viii.-340, cloth, price 10s. 6d.

### A COMPREHENSIVE COMMENTARY TO THE QURAN.

To which is prefixed Sale's Preliminary Discourse, with Additional Notes and Emendations.

Together with a Complete Index to the Text, Preliminary Discourse, and Notes.

By Rev. E. M. WHERRY, M.A., Lodiana.

> "As Mr. Wherry's book is intended for missionaries in India, it is no
> doubt well that they should be prepared to meet, if they can, the
> ordinary arguments and interpretations, and for this purpose Mr.
> Wherry's additions will prove useful."—*Saturday Review.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Second Edition. Post 8vo, pp. vi.-208, cloth, price 8s. 6d.

### THE BHAGAVAD-GÎTÂ.

Translated, with Introduction and Notes.

By John Davies, M.A. (Cantab.)

> "Let us add that his translation of the Bhagavad Gîtâ is, as we judge,
> the best that has as yet appeared in English, and that his
> Philological Notes are of quite peculiar value."—*Dublin Review.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. 96, cloth, price 5s.

### THE QUATRAINS OF OMAR KHAYYAM.

Translated by E. H. WHINFIELD, M.A., Barrister-at-Law, late H.M. Bengal Civil Service.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xxxii.-336, cloth, price 10s. 6d.

### THE QUATRAINS OF OMAR KHAYYAM.

The Persian Text, with an English Verse Translation.

By E. H. WHINFIELD, late of the Bengal Civil Service.

> "Mr. Whinfield has executed a difficult task with considerable
> success, and his version contains much that will be new to those who
> only know Mr. Fitzgerald's delightful selection."—*Academy.*
>
> "The most prominent features in the Quatrains are their profound
> agnosticism, combined with a fatalism based more on philosophic than
> religious grounds, their Epicureanism and the spirit of universal
> tolerance and charity which animates them."—*Calcutta Review.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xxiv.-268, cloth, price 9s.

### THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANIṢADS AND ANCIENT INDIAN METAPHYSICS.

As exhibited in a series of Articles contributed to the *Calcutta Review*.

By ARCHIBALD EDWARD GOUGH, M.A., Lincoln College, Oxford; Principal of the Calcutta Madrasa.

> "For practical purposes this is perhaps the most important of the
> works that have thus far appeared in 'Trübner's Oriental Series.'...
> We cannot doubt that for all who may take it up the work must be one
> of profound interest."—*Saturday Review.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In Two Volumes. Vol. I., post 8vo, pp. xxiv.-230, cloth, price 7s. 6d.

### A COMPARATIVE HISTORY OF THE EGYPTIAN AND MESOPOTAMIAN RELIGIONS.

By Dr. C. P. Tiele.

Vol. I.—History of the Egyptian Religion.

Translated from the Dutch with the Assistance of the Author.

By JAMES BALLINGAL.

> "It places in the hands of the English readers a history of Egyptian
> Religion which is very complete, which is based on the best materials,
> and which has been illustrated by the latest results of research. In
> this volume there is a great deal of information, as well as
> independent investigation, for the trustworthiness of which Dr.
> Tiele's name is in itself a guarantee; and the description of the
> successive religions under the Old Kingdom, the Middle Kingdom, and
> the New Kingdom, is given in a manner which is scholarly and
> minute."—*Scotsman.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xii.-302, cloth, price 8s. 6d.

### YUSUF AND ZULAIKHA.

A Poem by Jami.

Translated from the Persian into English Verse.

By Ralph T. H. Griffith.

> "Mr. Griffith, who has done already good service as translator into
> verse from the Sanskrit, has done further good work in this
> translation from the Persian, and he has evidently shown not a little
> skill in his rendering the quaint and very oriental style of his
> author into our more prosaic, less figurative, language.... The work,
> besides its intrinsic merits, is of importance as being one of the
> most popular and famous poems of Persia, and that which is read in all
> the independent native schools of India where Persian is
> taught."—*Scotsman.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. viii.-266, cloth, price 9s.

### LINGUISTIC ESSAYS.

By Carl Abel.

> "An entirely novel method of dealing with philosophical questions and
> impart a real human interest to the otherwise dry technicalities of
> the science."—*Standard.*
>
> "Dr. Abel is an opponent from whom it is pleasant to differ, for he
> writes with enthusiasm and temper, and his mastery over the English
> language fits him to be a champion of unpopular
> doctrines."—*Athenæum.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. ix.-281, cloth, price 10s. 6d.

### THE SARVA-DARSANA-SAMGRAHA;

Or, Review Of The Different Systems of Hindu Philosophy.

By Madhava Acarya.

Translated by E. B. COWELL, M. A., Professor of Sanskrit in the University of Cambridge, and A. E. GOUGH, M.A., Professor of Philosophy in the Presidency College, Calcutta.

This work is an interesting specimen of Hindu critical ability. The author successively passes in review the sixteen philosophical systems current in the fourteenth century in the South of India; and he gives what appears to him to be their most important tenets.

> "The translation is trustworthy throughout. A protracted sojourn in
> India, where there is a living tradition, has familiarised the
> translators with Indian thought."—*Athenæum.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. lxv.-368, cloth, price 14s.

### TIBETAN TALES DERIVED FROM INDIAN SOURCES.

Translated from the Tibetan of the Kah-Gyur.

By F. Anton Von Schiefner.

Done into English from the German, with an Introduction,

By W. R. S. Ralston, M.A.

> "Mr. Ralston, whose name is so familiar to all lovers of Russian
> folk-lore, has supplied some interesting Western analogies and
> parallels, drawn, for the most part, from Slavonic sources, to the
> Eastern folk-tales, culled from the Kahgyur, one of the divisions of
> the Tibetan sacred books."—*Academy.*
>
> "The translation ... could scarcely have fallen into better hands. An
> Introduction ... gives the leading facts in the lives of those
> scholars who have given their attention to gaining a knowledge of the
> Tibetan literature and language."—*Calcutta Review.*
>
> "Ought to interest all who care for the East, for amusing stories, or
> for comparative folk-lore."—*Pall Mall Gazette.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xvi.-224, cloth, price 9s.

### UDÂNAVARGA.

A Collection of Verses from the Buddhist Canon.

Compiled by DHARMATRÂTA.

Being the Northern Buddhist Version of Dhammapada.

Translated from the Tibetan of Bkah-hgyur, with Notes, and Extracts from the Commentary of Pradjnavarman,

By W. Woodville Rockhill.

> "Mr. Rockhill's present work is the first from which assistance will
> be gained for a more accurate understanding of the Pali text; it is,
> in fact, as yet the only term of comparison available to us. The
> 'Udanavarga,' the Thibetan version, was originally discovered by the
> late M. Schiefner, who published the Tibetan text, and had intended
> adding a translation, an intention frustrated by his death, but which
> has been carried out by Mr. Rockhill.... Mr. Rockhill may be
> congratulated for having well accomplished a difficult
> task."—*Saturday Review.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In Two Volumes, post 8vo, pp. xxiv.-566, cloth, accompanied by a Language Map, price 18s.

### A SKETCH OF THE MODERN LANGUAGES OF AFRICA.

By Robert Needham Cust,

Barrister-at-Law, and late of Her Majesty's Indian Civil Service.

> "Any one at all interested in African languages cannot do better than
> get Mr. Cust's book. It is encyclopædic in its scope, and the reader
> gets a start clear away in any particular language, and is left free
> to add to the initial sum of knowledge there collected."—*Natal
> Mercury.*
>
> "Mr. Cust has contrived to produce a work of value to linguistic
> students."—*Nature.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Third Edition. Post 8vo, pp. xv.-250, cloth, price 7s. 6d.

### OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF RELIGION TO THE SPREAD OF THE UNIVERSAL RELIGIONS.

By C. P. Tiele,

Doctor of Theology, Professor of the History of Religions in the University of Leyden.

Translated from the Dutch by J. Estlin Carpenter, M.A.

> "Few books of its size contain the result of so much wide thinking,
> able and laborious study, or enable the reader to gain a better
> bird's-eye view of the latest results of investigations into the
> religious history of nations. As Professor Tiele modestly says, 'In
> this little book are outlines—pencil sketches, I might say—nothing
> more.' But there are some men whose sketches from a thumb-nail are of
> far more worth than an enormous canvas covered with the crude painting
> of others, and it is easy to see that these pages, full of
> information, these sentences, cut and perhaps also dry, short and
> clear, condense the fruits of long and thorough research."—*Scotsman.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xii.-312, with Maps and Plan, cloth, price 14s.

### A HISTORY OF BURMA.

Including Burma Proper, Pegu, Taungu, Tenasserim, and Arakan. From the Earliest Time to the End of the First War with British India.

By Lieut.-Gen. Sir Arthur P. Phayre, G.C.M.G., K.C.S.I., and C.B., Membre Correspondant de la Société Académique Indo-Chinoise de France.

> "Sir Arthur Phayre's contribution to Trübner's Oriental Series
> supplies a recognised want, and its appearance has been looked forward
> to for many years.... General Phayre deserves great credit for the
> patience and industry which has resulted in this History of
> Burma."—*Saturday Review.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Third Edition. Post 8vo, pp. 276, cloth, price 7s. 6d.

### RELIGION IN CHINA.

By Joseph Edkins, D.D., Peking.

> Containing a Brief Account of the Three Religions of the Chinese, with
> Observations on the Prospects of Christian Conversion amongst that
> People.
>
> "Dr. Edkins has been most careful in noting the varied and often
> complex phases of opinion, so as to give an account of considerable
> value of the subject."—*Scotsman.*
>
> "As a missionary, it has been part of Dr. Edkins' duty to study the
> existing religions in China, and his long residence in the country has
> enabled him to acquire an intimate knowledge of them as they at
> present exist."—*Saturday Review.*
>
> "Dr. Edkins' valuable work, of which this is a second and revised
> edition, has, from the time that it was published, been the standard
> authority upon the subject of which it treats."—*Nonconformist.*
>
> "Dr. Edkins ... may now be fairly regarded as among the first
> authorities on Chinese religion and language."—*British Quarterly
> Review.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. x.-274, cloth, price 9s.

### THE LIFE OF THE BUDDHA AND THE EARLY HISTORY OF HIS ORDER.

Derived from Tibetan Works in the Bkah-hgyur and Bstan-hgyur. Followed by notices on the Early History of Tibet and Khoten.

Translated by W. W. ROCKHILL, Second Secretary U.S. Legation in China.

> "The volume bears testimony to the diligence and fulness with which
> the author has consulted and tested the ancient documents bearing upon
> his remarkable subject."—*Times.*
>
> "Will be appreciated by those who devote themselves to those Buddhist
> studies which have of late years taken in these Western regions so
> remarkable a development. Its matter possesses a special interest as
> being derived from ancient Tibetan works, some portions of which, here
> analysed and translated, have not yet attracted the attention of
> scholars. The volume is rich in ancient stories bearing upon the
> world's renovation and the origin of castes, as recorded in these
> venerable authorities."—*Daily News.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Third Edition. Post 8vo, pp. viii.-464, cloth, price 16s.

### THE SANKHYA APHORISMS OF KAPILA.

With Illustrative Extracts from the Commentaries.

Translated by J. R. BALLANTYNE, LL.D., late Principal of the Benares College.

Edited by FITZEDWARD HALL.

> "The work displays a vast expenditure of labour and scholarship, for
> which students of Hindoo philosophy have every reason to be grateful
> to Dr. Hall and the publishers."—*Calcutta Review.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In Two Volumes, post 8vo, pp. cviii.-242, and viii.-370, cloth, price 24s. Dedicated by permission to H.R.H. the Prince of Wales.

### BUDDHIST RECORDS OF THE WESTERN WORLD,

Translated from the Chinese of Hiuen Tsiang (a.d. 629).

By Samuel Beal, B.A.,

(Trin. Coll., Camb.); R.N. (Retired Chaplain and N.I.); Professor of Chinese, University College, London; Rector of Wark, Northumberland, &c.

An eminent Indian authority writes respecting this work:—"Nothing more can be done in elucidating the History of India until Mr. Beal's translation of the 'Si-yu-ki' appears."

> "It is a strange freak of historical preservation that the best
> account of the condition of India at that ancient period has come down
> to us in the books of travel written by the Chinese pilgrims, of whom
> Hwen Thsang is the best known."—*Times.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xlviii.-398, cloth, price 12s.

### THE ORDINANCES OF MANU.

Translated from the Sanskrit, with an Introduction.

By the late A.C. BURNELL, Ph.D., C.I.E.

Completed and Edited by E.W. HOPKINS, Ph.D., of Columbia College, N.Y.

> "This work is full of interest; while for the student of sociology and
> the science of religion it is full of importance. It is a great boon
> to get so notable a work in so accessible a form, admirably edited,
> and competently translated."—*Scotsman.*
>
> "Few men were more competent than Burnell to give us a really good
> translation of this well-known law book, first rendered into English
> by Sir William Jones. Burnell was not only an independent Sanskrit
> scholar, but an experienced lawyer, and he joined to these two
> important qualifications the rare faculty of being able to express his
> thoughts in clear and trenchant English.... We ought to feel very
> grateful to Dr. Hopkins for having given us all that could be
> published of the translation left by Burnell."—F. Max Müller in the
> *Academy.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xii.-234, cloth, price 9s.

### THE LIFE AND WORKS OF ALEXANDER CSOMA DE KOROS,

Between 1819 and 1842. With a Short Notice of all his Published and Unpublished Works and Essays. From Original and for most part Unpublished Documents.

By THEODORE DUKA, M.D., F.R.C.S. (Eng.), Surgeon-Major H.M.'s Bengal Medical Service, Retired, &c.

> "Not too soon have Messrs. Trübner added to their valuable Oriental
> Series a history of the life and works of one of the most gifted and
> devoted of Oriental students, Alexander Csoma de Koros. It is
> forty-three years since his death, and though an account of his career
> was demanded soon after his decease, it has only now appeared in the
> important memoir of his compatriot, Dr. Duka."—*Bookseller.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In Two Volumes, post 8vo, pp. xii.-318 and vi.-312, cloth, price 21s.

### MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS RELATING TO INDO-CHINA.

Reprinted from "Dalrymple's Oriental Repertory," "Asiatic Researches," and the "Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal."

*CONTENTS OF VOL. I.*

I.—Some Accounts of Quedah. By Michael Topping.

II.—Report made to the Chief and Council of Balambangan, by Lieut. James Barton, of his several Surveys.

III.—Substance of a Letter to the Court of Directors from Mr. John Jesse, dated July 20, 1775, at Borneo Proper.

IV.—Formation of the Establishment of Poolo Peenang.

V.—The Gold of Limong. By John Macdonald.

VI.—On Three Natural Productions of Sumatra. By John Macdonald.

VII.—On the Traces of the Hindu Language and Literature extant amongst the Malays. By William Marsden.

VIII.—Some Account of the Elastic Gum Vine of Prince-Wales Island. By James Howison.

IX.—A Botanical Description of Urceola Elastica, or Caoutchouc Vine of Sumatra and Pulo-Pinang. By William Roxburgh, M.D.

X.—An Account of the Inhabitants of the Poggy, or Nassau Islands, lying off Sumatra. By John Crisp.

XI.—Remarks on the Species of Pepper which are found on Prince-Wales Island. By William Hunter, M.D.

XII.—On the Languages and Literature of the Indo-Chinese Nations. By J. Leyden, M.D.

XIII.—Some Account of an Orang-Outang of remarkable height found on the Island of Sumatra. By Clarke Abel, M.D.

XIV.—Observations on the Geological Appearances and General Features of Portions of the Malayan Peninsula. By Captain James Low.

XV.—Short Sketch of the Geology of Pulo-Pinang and the Neighbouring Islands. By T. Ware.

XVI.—Climate of Singapore.

XVII.—Inscription on the Jetty at Singapore.

XVIII.—Extract of a Letter from Colonel J. Low.

XIX.—Inscription at Singapore.

XX—An Account of Several Inscriptions found in Province Wellesley. By Lieut.-Col. James Low.

XXI.—Note on the Inscriptions from Singapore and Province Wellesley. By J. W. Laidlay.

XXII.—On an Inscription from Keddah. By Lieut.-Col. Low.

XXIII.—A Notice of the Alphabets of the Philippine Islands.

XXIV.—Succinct Review of the Observations of the Tides in the Indian Archipelago.

XXV.—Report on the Tin of the Province of Mergui. By Capt. G. B Tremenheere.

XXVI.—Report on the Manganese of Mergui Province. By Capt. G. B. Tremenheere.

XXVII.—Paragraphs to be added to Capt. G. B. Tremenheere's Report.

XXVIII.—Second Report on the Tin of Mergui. By Capt. G. B. Tremenheere.

XXIX.—Analysis of Iron Ores from Tavoy and Mergui, and of Limestone from Mergui. By Dr. A. Ure.

XXX.—Report of a Visit to the Pakchan River, and of some Tin Localities in the Southern Portion of the Tenasserim Provinces. By Capt. G. B. Tremenheere.

XXXI.—Report on a Route from the Mouth of the Pakchan to Krau, and thence across the Isthmus of Krau to the Gulf of Siam. By Capt. Al. Fraser and Capt. J. G. Forlong.

XXXII.—Report, &c., from Capt. G. B. Tremenheere on the Price of Mergui Tin Ore.

XXXIII.—Remarks on the Different Species of Orang-utan. By E. Blyth.

XXXIV.—Further Remarks. By E. Blyth.

*CONTENTS OF VOL. II.*

XXXV.—Catalogue of Mammalia inhabiting the Malayan Peninsula and Islands. By Theodore Cantor, M.D.

XXXVI.—On the Local and Relative Geology of Singapore. By J. R. Logan.

XXXVII.—Catalogue of Reptiles inhabiting the Malayan Peninsula and Islands. By Theodore Cantor, M.D.

XXXVIII.—Some Account of the Botanical Collection brought from the Eastward, in 1841, by Dr. Cantor. By the late W. Griffith.

XXXIX.—On the Flat-Horned Taurine Cattle of S.E. Asia. By E. Blyth.

XL.—Note, by Major-General G. B. Tremenheere.

General Index.

Index of Vernacular Terms.

Index of Zoological Genera and Sub-Genera occurring in Vol. II.

"The papers treat of almost every aspect of Indo-China—its philology, economy, geography, geology—and constitute a very material and important contribution to our accessible information regarding that country and its people."—*Contemporary Review.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xii.-72, cloth, price 5s.

### THE SATAKAS OF BHARTRIHARI.

Translated from the Sanskrit

By the Rev. B. Hale Wortham, M.R.A.S.,

Rector of Eggesford, North Devon.

> "A very interesting addition to Trübner's Oriental Series."—*Saturday
> Review.*
>
> "Many of the Maxims in the book have a Biblical ring and beauty of
> expression."—*St. James' Gazette.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xii.-180, cloth, price 6s.

### ANCIENT PROVERBS AND MAXIMS FROM BURMESE SOURCES;

Or, THE NITI LITERATURE OF BURMA.

By James Gray,

Author of "Elements of Pali Grammar," "Translation of the Dhammapada," &c.

The Sanscrit-Pâli word Nîti is equivalent to "conduct" in its abstract, and "guide" in its concrete signification. As applied to books, it is a general term for a treatise which includes maxims, pithy sayings, and didactic stories, intended as a guide to such matters of everyday life as form the character of an individual and influence him in his relations to his fellow-men. Treatises of this kind have been popular in all ages, and have served as a most effective medium of instruction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xxxii. and 330, cloth, price 7s. 6d.

### MASNAVI I MA' NAVI:

THE SPIRITUAL COUPLETS OF MAULANA JALALU-'D-DIN MUHAMMAD I RUMI.

Translated and Abridged by E. H. WHINFIELD, M.A., Late of H.M. Bengal Civil Service.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. viii. and 346, cloth, price 10s. 6d.

### MANAVA-DHARMA-CASTRA: THE CODE OF MANU.

Original Sanskrit Text, with Critical Notes. By J. Jolly, Ph.D.,

Professor of Sanskrit in the University of Wurzburg; late Tagore Professor of Law in the University of Calcutta.

The date assigned by Sir William Jones to this Code—the well-known Great Law Book of the Hindus—is 1250-500 b.c., although the rules and precepts contained in it had probably existed as tradition for countless ages before. There has been no reliable edition of the Text for Students for many years past, and it is believed, therefore, that Prof. Jolly's work will supply a want long felt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. 215, cloth, price 7s. 6d.

### LEAVES FROM MY CHINESE SCRAP-BOOK.

By Frederic Henry Balfour.

Author of "Waifs and Strays from the Far East," "Taoist Texts," "Idiomatic Phrases in the Peking Colloquial," &c. &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xvi.-548, with Six Maps, cloth, price 21s.

### LINGUISTIC AND ORIENTAL ESSAYS.

Written from the Year 1847 to 1887. *Second Series.*

By Robert Needham Cust, LL.D.,

Barrister-at-Law; Honorary Secretary of the Royal Asiatic Society; Late Member of Her Majesty's Indian Civil Service.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In Two Volumes, post 8vo, pp. x.-308 and vi.-314, cloth, price 25s.

### MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS RELATING TO INDO-CHINA.

Edited By R. Rost, Ph.D., &c. &c., Librarian to the India Office.

Second Series.

Reprinted for the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society from the Malayan "Miscellanies," the "Transactions and Journal" of the Batavian Society, and the "Journals" of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, and the Royal Geographical and Royal Asiatic Societies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xii.-512, price 16s.

### FOLK-TALES OF KASHMIR.

By the Rev. J. Hinton Knowles, F.R.G.S., M.R.A.S., &c.

(C.M.S.) Missionary to the Kashmiris.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In Two Volumes, post 8vo, pp. xii.-336 and X.-352, cloth, price 21s.

### MEDIÆVAL RESEARCHES FROM EASTERN ASIATIC SOURCES.

Fragments Towards the Knowledge of the Geography and History of Central and Western Asia from the Thirteenth to the Seventeenth Century.

By E. Bretschneider, M.D.,

Formerly Physician of the Russian Legation at Pekin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In Two Volumes, post 8vo, pp. l.-408 and 431, cloth, price 36s.

### ALBERUNI'S INDIA:

AN ACCOUNT OF ITS RELIGION, PHILOSOPHY, LITERATURE, GEOGRAPHY, CHRONOLOGY,  
ASTRONOMY, CUSTOMS, LAW, AND ASTROLOGY (About a.d. 1031).

Translated into English.

With Notes and Indices by Prof. EDWARD SACHAU, University of Berlin.

∵ The Arabic Original, with an Index of the Sanskrit Words, Edited by Professor SACHAU, is in the press.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Post 8vo, pp. xxxvii.-218, cloth, price 10s.

### THE LIFE OF HIUEN TSIANG.

By the Shamans Hwui Li and Yen-tsung.

With a Preface containing an account of the Works of I-Tsing.

By Samuel Beal, B.A.

(Trin. Coll., Camb.); Professor of Chinese, University College, London; Rector of Wark, Northumberland, &c.

Author of "Buddhist Records of the Western World," "The Romantic Legend of Sakya Buddha," &c.

When the Pilgrim Hiuen Tsiang returned from his travels in India, he took up his abode in the Temple of "Great Benevolence;" this convent had been constructed by the Emperor in honour of the Empress, Wen-te-hau. After Hiuen Tsiang's death, his disciple, Hwui Li, composed a work which gave an account of his illustrious Master's travels; this work when he completed he buried, and refused to discover its place of concealment. But previous to his death he revealed its whereabouts to Yen-tsung, by whom it was finally revised and published. This is "The Life of Hiuen Tsiang." It is a valuable sequel to the Si-yu-ki, correcting and illustrating it in many particulars.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*IN PREPARATION:—*

Post 8vo.

### A SKETCH OF THE MODERN LANGUAGES OF OCEANIA.

By R. N. Cust, LL. D.

Author of "Modern Languages of the East," "Modern Languages of Africa," &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### London: Trübner & CO., 57 and 59 Ludgate Hill.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
