+++
title = "05 आणव-प्रकाशनम्"

+++
## Thought purificaiton
When a thought construct (vikalpa) cannot become pure by itself, and one has to depend on other means for its purification, the aspirant is decidedly staying in the lower stage of spiritual development; in other words, in him śaktipāta has occurred to a lesser degree. Therefore, for the purification of vikalpas, and because he is limited himself, he resorts to means that are also limited. Hence, the individual takes up practices of the intellect (buddhi), vital energy (prāṇa), or the body itself for this purpose.+++(5)+++ 

Among these kinds of aspirants, those more advanced proceed on the path of meditation (dhyāna). The Tantrasāra gives a brief account of how this contemplative meditation is to be performed: Though it is called dhyāna, it is quite distinct from the dhyānas found in various holy texts, especially those in which the aspirant imagines his desired deity as having a face and limbs. 

## dhyāna
The Tantrasāra describes dhyāna in the following manner: In the core of his conscious heart, the aspirant meditates upon the self-luminous essential reality, which abides in all. This meditation is to be performed in such a way that the three-namely, the subject, the instrument of knowledge, and the object, representing fire, the sun, and the moon, respectively-have coalesced together and become the unity of a single mass of consciousness. This meditation is to be continued as long as they have their separate identities, until they shine as one light and blaze up as the fire of the great Lord. This fire is to be meditated upon as surrounded by twelve Kālīs. These Kālīs are none but the flames of the wheel of fire. This fire should be thought of as emitting rays through out lets such as the eyes, which take their rest on the object of external senses. The object is to be thought of as being nourished by the creative energy of the moon, then it is maintained and made manifest by the sun, and finally it is dissolved by the energy of fire so that it may be drawn inside and made transcendent (anuttara).+++(5)+++ 

When this type of dhyāna is continuously performed, the aspirant quickly realizes that every object and idea is nothing but the essence of pure consciousness. He further realizes that creation and other functions are essentially the play of the Lord. 

## uccāra
After dhyāna, the text gives a description of uccāra. The upward movement of prāṇa is commonly known as uccāra; how ever, uccāra has the characteristics of spanda, which is the very soul of it. 

prāṇa is of two kinds, one general (sāmānya) and the other specific (viśeṣa). In the former, difference of any sort is totally absent, while in the latter, because of distinct activities, the same prāṇa shows itself in five forms, known as prāṇa, apāna, samāna, udāna, and vyāna. It is quite evident that these five have their base in the general prāṇa. 

Because of the vibrating movement of prāṇa, inarticulate sound, known as the "unstruck” sound (anāhatanāda), becomes : manifest. It sounds continuously, without any break, in the heart of every living being. This nāda is associated with two bījas, namely sr̥ṣṭi-bīja (sa) and samhāra-bīja (ha). 

The activity of prāṇa functions without any conscious effort on the part of the living being. Usually prāṇa moves along the chan nels of ida and pingala. The middle path remains blocked for the ordinary human being. When, by the grace of the spiritual teacher, the middle path opens up, then the aspirant's journey toward the supreme begins. 

The aspirant realizes that the movement of prāṇa is associated with Śakti. It is she who, in the form of hamsa, is moving forward and is the real mover of prāṇa. At that time, the aspirant realizes that she gets the two bījas nourished in the two places of their origin, namely, the heart (hrdaya) and dvādaśānta, the top of the head. Upon this realization, the yogin feels that the prāṇa, before its rise, takes rest in the void of the heart; then, by its externalization as apāna, the external objects not only shine forth but also get nourished by apāna, the moon. The yogin then experiences the all-pervasive nature of prāṇa. On account of specific activities of prāṇa in various parts of the body, the yogin experiences various kinds of delights according to his aptitude in causing the prāṇa to rest in these spots. These delights (ānanda) are named nirānanda and others. They are six in number. 

By the experience of these delights in different parts of the body, he finally realizes that the highest place of rest is some where other than the body and prāṇa. Ultimately, he realizes the highest form of delight, known as universal bliss (jagadānanda), in which there is no limitation, for it shines in all directions and where ever-shining consciousness alone remains. It expresses itself as the knower, the means of knowledge, and the known objects. It expands by the nectar of the divine joy of absolute sovereignty, in which there is no need for contemplation. 

It should be noted here also that prāṇa and apāna are two factors which perform the functions of dissolution and creation, while samāna balances the two pulls of energy in the inner viṣuvat, the void. Then udāna, the upper current, begins to flow along the middle path. Finally, the vital energy becomes vyāna, the all pervading one in which all limitations have their end. 

The yogin, by means of his close observation of two bījas mentioned above, should make his vikalpas free from impurities. Then, according to his proficiency of entering the place of rest : in different parts of the body (viśranti), he first experiences the delights (ānandas) mentioned above, followed by udbhava, kampa, nidrāi, and ghūrni. The bodily centers where they are experienced are known as mūlādhāra, kanda, hrdaya, telu, and dvādaśānta. Dvādaśānta, which is known also as urdhvakuṇḍalinī, is the place where the difference of śakti and śiva ends. It is of the characteristic of “vibration of consciousness" (samvitspanda). 

The inarticulate sound (anahātanāda) is ever present, but it becomes manifest by the rhythmic movement of prāṇa, which gives rise to varṇa, or syllabic sound. It should be borne in mind that this nada is not properly called varna, as it is the cause of syllables. Seed mantras (bījas) known as sr̥ṣṭi and saṁhāra (sa and ha) are the two chief syllables in association with which anahātanāda becomes manifest. Therefore, the yogin tries to fix his mind in them so that he may get the touch of nāda. He practices hearing the nāda by uttering different syllables either ending in a vowel or not ending in any vowel, for he knows that nāda abides in all the varnas, latent in an undivided form. Even by calling to mind the ever-sounding nāda he experiences identity with pure consciousness. 

INTRODUCTION 13 
