+++
title = "7 Enlightenment and the Classical Culture of Possession"

+++
> Spirit is the absolute substance, which is the unity of the different independent self-consciousnesses, which in their opposition enjoy perfect freedom and independence.  
An “I” that is a “we” and “we” that is an “I.”  
—G. W. F. HEGEL, The Phenomenology of Spirit (1977:110)

IN THIS WELL-KNOWN PASSAGE, THE EARLY NINETEENTH-century German philosopher G.W.F. Hegel addresses the master/slave dialectic, hierarchizing and othering between selves, defined as units of self-consciousness (Selbstbewußtsein)1 engaged in an unequal struggle. Hegel’s words are also eerily reminiscent of internal othering of the sort that might appear during possession states, at least as described in greater South Asia. The self-consciousnesses that Hegel describes are like facing mirrors: They reflect themselves but also reflect themselves reflecting themselves ad infinitum. Among them are losers and winners, manifestations and demanifestations, and in the short term the prominence of alternative selves, alternative consciousnesses. We have seen this writ large in the Vedas, with the sage imploring Soma to “enter us as man’s observer” (Ṛgveda 8.48.15) and recording brahman’s creation of a universe, then infusing or entering it with parts of itself, many of them oppositional (e.g., Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 11.2.3.1–2 and Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.3.1–3). More appositely, we see this in the Mahābhārata, in the tales of Nala, of Vipula Bhārgava and Ruci, of Aśvatthāman, in all of which separate internal self-consciousnesses (to use Hegel’s term) are othered differently. Legitimation occurs between units of self-consciousness—rather than within personalities, beings, and essences through recognition or acknowledgment (Anerkennung), factors of differentiation or opposition. This process, like the entities and self-consciousnesses that it weighs and measures, is intrinsically phenomenological.

We now consider more of this phenomenology, a distinctive phenomenology of possession as it occurs in soteriologically and epistemologically significant texts, including the Yogasūtras and Brahmasūtras, as well as narrative that describes modes of experience often marked with emotional signification beyond their descriptive value. Thus, the appearance of possession as prescription in texts that have been classified as philosophical, even if narrative, may come as a surprise. The domain of rarefied philosophical and other technical literary works lies somewhat beyond the realm of “public” Sanskritic culture, venues in which we might justly expect to find accounts of visually accessible, performative phenomena such as possession. However, in philosophical texts possession does occupy a small space, in both prescriptive and descriptive discussions of religio-philosophical practice. In India, practice and theory are barely separable; in fact they are indissolubly linked. Yet both fall within the culturally determined realm of philosophical discourse, an intellectual fact that has not been adequately comprehended by Western philosophers.2 Thus, texts that have a primarily philosophical signature are not out of bounds for discussion of possession. Philosophical and scientific treatises in India are often framed by creation myths, illustrate doctrinal principles with reference to obscure ritual minutiae, and resort to sruti or the testimony of the Veda as final proof (pramāṇa) of the validity of doctrinal assertions. Occasionally, possession appears as a trope, and it can be jarring, though not unpleasantly so, to a reader not accustomed to the broad cultural boundaries of philosophical discourse. In such cases it may be regarded as an uninvited ontological or soteriological guest at an epistemological party.

This chapter examines descriptions of possession and its deployment in Yoga, Vedānta, and Buddhist texts, with a single important reference to a Jaina text and a vital digression into hagiographies of the great Vedānta philosopher Śaṅkara. We see from these discussions, somewhat in support of Lariviere’s contention discussed in Chapter 1, that philosophical and literary traditions are not always distanced from religion or other cultural practices on the ground, as I believe most of the arguments in this volume testify. The universe of practice is directly engaged or indirectly implied in philosophical discourse, from ritual prescription to the practice of everyday life. We see elements of this intrusive and occasionally bothersome universe imprinted on Indian philosophical traditions and examine how it influences their discursive projects.

## Possession as Yoga Practice

Possession is mentioned in the third adhyāya of Patañjali’s Yogasūtms (YS), the chapter dealing with extraordinary powers (vibhūti, siddhi) gained through the practice of yoga. YS 3.38 reads: “Due to loosening the cause of bondage and from full knowledge of [the mechanics of psychic] movement, entrance [āveśa] of one’s mind [citta] into another’s body [becomes possible]” (bandhakāraṇaśaithilyāt pracārasaṃvedimāc ca cinasya paraśarīrāveśaḥ).3 The primary commentator on the YS, Vyāsa, believes that the cause (kāmṇa) of bondage in the form of the repository of one’s accumulated actions (karmāśaya) is loosened by the power of samādhi. It is the evaporation of the natural bondage of the siddha or accomplished yogin to objects of perception that allows the citta—thought or the power of mind—to flow into the body (and mind) of another person, regardless of the extent to which the other individual is caught in the grip of his or her or her own perceptual universe and karmic web.

Vijñānabhikṣu, a sixteenth-century vedāntin who wrote an important commentary on Vyāsa, adds that the movement (pracāra) of consciousness from one body to another is conducted along a certain nāḍi (subtle nerve).4 Nārāyaṇa Tīrtha, the author of a bhakti-oriented commentary on the YS titled Yogasiddhāntacandrikā,5 says that the citta enters and exits through the apānanāḍi, the nāḍi controlling the downward movement of breath. He adds that, after the thread connecting the citta of the yogin to his own body is severed, the experience of entering another body, whether dead or alive, becomes like that of entering another country. Analogies abound for this peculiar action: Vyāsa states that the movement of the mind is followed by that of the senses, like ordinary worker bees flying along after the “king bee.” In his Vivaraṇa on Vyśsa’s commentary, Śaṇkara states that the consciousness of one who is not a siddha is agitated by its fixedness to the karmic repository nearly to the point of immobility. Its limited mobility is like a bell that has been struck or the flickering of a heap of glowing coals.6

In spite of these explanations, the problem of determining the exact sense of the YS remains. What enters or possesses the psychophysical complex of the individual being possessed is the citta of the possessor. This citta is most often understood as “mind” or “thought.” Yet a difference exists between the two. The mind, as it is usually understood in the West, is the container of thought, inviting the possibility that a limited invasion consisting of part of the citta might occur in the form of introducing a single thought into the individual being psychically entered. Alternatively, the mind may be regarded as the container of thoughts, intentions, feelings, karmic residue, and so on, with, in the case of āveśa, a capacity for greater interaction and decision-making in the mind and body of the one being possessed. Although the citta in the YS usually indicates “thought” alone, here it appears to signify the mind together with the “inner organ” (antaḥkaraṇa) or heart.7 It is in this latter sense that Vyāsa and Vijñānabhikṣu appear to interpret citta, at least in this sūtra. Nevertheless, the distinction is important, because the extent of possession and the manner in which it is effected are two of the important features in determining yogically induced āveśa. We have already seen that possession can be instigated either by the possessed or the possessor, and here it appears that the possession occurs as a result of the motivation or intention of an outside agent, the yogin (or yoginī), who would bring with him (or her) an entire mental apparatus containing thoughts, ideas, impressions, and so on. Still, the YS leaves open the possibility of a limited or partial possession, such as entering and influencing another’s dream state by introducing a single thought or image, or wholesale takeover of the other’s thoughts, intentions, and mental powers, such as occurred when Śaṇkara transferred his citta into the body of the dead King Amaruka, an episode we examine in detail below. Thus, in this sūtra, citta probably indicates an entire mentating apparatus, though Patañjali’s certain knowledge of exemplars—such as Vipula Bhārgava’s entering the mind and body of Ruci, who retained at least partial awareness of her situation—suggests that citta here can also indicate a single thought or a localized body of thoughts. Regardless of the commentators’ formal analysis, the very presence of this sūtra in the YS suggests the accuracy of Eliade’s observation, noted earlier, of eclecticism in the practice of textually sanctioned (and sanctified) yoga: Possession states, recognized from either experience or legend, were admitted (with certain conditions) into the yoga śāstra.

This sūtra does not exist entirely in isolation in the YS. Several other sūtras in the third chapter or pāda of the YS illustrate that the yogin (or yoginī) trains his (or her) mind or consciousness to temporarily leave the physical body in order to experience extrasensory phenomena. The process described in the YS for realizing any siddhi (and we must assume this for YS 3.38 on possession, even though the key vocabulary is missing) is to bring together and deploy as a single unit the three highest limbs of the eightfold path (aṣṭāṅga) of yoga, namely, dhāraṇa (concentration), dhyāna (meditation), and samādhi, (ecstasy). This process is called saṃyama (bringing together), and the YS uses it in the ablative (saṃyamāt) in a number of sūtras in the third pāda, indicating that it is a practice. For example, YS 3.21 states, “By practicing saṃyama on the [outer] form of the body, when its power to be known is stopped [and] there being no contact with the light of the eye, there is disappearance [of the yogin’s body].”8 YS 3.24 states, “By practicing saṃyama on different kinds of strength, the yogin acquires the strength of an elephant, etc.”9 The next sūtra, YS 3.25, states, “By casting the light of [higher] sense-activity toward them, there is [intuitive] knowledge regarding the subtle, the veiled, and far away objects.”10 The next sūtra, YS 3.26, states, “By practicing saṃyama on the sun, [the yogin] gains the knowledge of the worlds [bhuvana].”11 Other sūtras say that practicing saṃyama on the moon gives rise to knowledge of the arrangement of the stars (3.27), if the practice is directed to the navel cakra, the yogin obtains knowledge of the arrangement of the body (3.29), and so on. All of this indicates that the yogin or yoginī was able, theoretically at least, to use their more exalted yogic skills to move their minds or consciousness beyond the confines of the body, as well as to transform the very nature of their bodies. From this platform, entering the bodies of others was a very short (and natural) step.

Āveśa’s sense of pervasion in the YS is intriguingly close to notions of pervasion expressed by Patañjali’s use of the words samādhi and samāpatti. YS 3.3 defines samādhi as a state in which one’s self-nature becomes as if void as the mind becomes completely immersed in an object of meditation.12 Samāpatti, usually translated as “absorption,” is nearly identical to samādhi. Indeed, arriving at an agreeable distinction between them has always been problematic. YS 1.41 appears to describe samāpatti as a state outside meditative practice, an experience of absorption in the world in which the mind acquires clear perception of a cognition, the object cognized, and the cognizer.13 Āveśa shares this quality of absorption or immersion, but is defined neither as a state of meditative one-pointedness nor as a state of active experience resulting from meditation. Because it is not a frequently attested technical term in yoga philosophy, āveśa remains undefined in the YS. Its meaning is assumed from other contexts as an experience of absorption in an object, entity, notion, or psychic state that lies beyond the meditative process per se.

The great Jain scholar Hemacandra (1088–1172) addressed the topic of possession at surprising length in his Yogaśāstra, at the end of his obligatory chapter on breath control (prāṇāyāma). After describing a practice in which the aspirant gains the ability to move the breath (vāyu) at will from the respiratory system through the aperture at the crown of the head (brahmarandhra), then guiding it to settle on specified objects, such as fragrant plants, camphor, small birds, then large animate and inanimate objects (5.264–73), Hemacandra states that one should enter (praviśet) “bodies from which the breath has gone” by utilizing the vāyu from the left nostril (evaṃ parāsudeheṣu praviśed vāmanāsayā). The primary subtle channel or nāḍi on the left side of the body, terminating at the left nostril, associated with the moon and tantric practice, is called iḍā.14 In the next line of this penultimate verse of the chapter on yogic use of breath Hemacandra issues a warning: “Entry into the body of a living being [jīvaddehapraveśaḥ] is not addressed because of fear of transgression.”

This, however, does not prevent him from offering a deeper analysis of the process in his autocommentary called Svopajñavivaraṇa (or Svopajñavṛtti):

After exiting through the aperture at the crown of the head, one should enter [praviśya] [another body] through the other’s downward moving breath [apānavartmanā]. Then one should spread oneself from the lotus at the navel [ānābhyambujam] to the lotus at the heart via the suṣumṇā or central subtle channel. At that point, one should obstruct the movement of the other’s prāṇa with one’s own breath [vāyu]. From that body, he should continue in this fashion until that embodied being falls flat, his movement faded away. When that other body has been completely liberated [of its previous occupant], the yogin whose actions and senses have come alive in all the activities [of the other] should commence movement as if in his own body. The intelligent [yogin] may play about fully in that other body for half a day or even for a day. Again, through that same process one should enter one’s own body [puram].

Hemacandra concludes this interesting account of entering another’s body, one of the most detailed I have found in Sanskrit literature, by stating that mastery of this skill enables the intelligent yogin to move about willfully, without attachment, as if liberated.15

## Possession and the Subtle Body in the Yogavāsiṣṭha
The Yogavāsiṣṭha contains a passage (6.1.82) that is as detailed as Hemacandra’s on the process of possessing other bodies. This important ninth-century text in which yoga, Vedānta, and surreal transformation are central recounts stories told to Rāma as a child by Vasiṣṭha, his family’s guru. The passage in question is included in a lengthy tale of King Śikhidhvaja of Mālva and his devoted wife, Cūḍālā, who were supremely pious and dedicated to the pursuit of self-knowledge (ātmajñāna). It was Cūḍālā who attained enlightenment first, described here as expanded consciousness (citpracetanī, 6.1.78.29). Selflessly, she wished the same for her husband. But his patronizing attitude toward her achievements spurred her to seek solitude in the acquisition of siddhis. She transformed herself into a male sage, a more convincing authority figure to her husband, then into an amorous woman, until finally she reverted to herself. This series of transformations leads the narrator, Vasiṣṭha, into a lengthy digression on the nature of prāṇa (vital air) and the manipulation of kuṇḍalinī, the serpentine energy in the spine that, when controlled, leads to ecstatic experience and enlightenment. In the course of this discussion, Vasiṣṭha eventually turned to the means by which yogins were able to make their bodies either tiny, the size of atoms (aṇutām), or extremely large (sthūlatām, 6.1.82.1).

Vasiṣṭha describes three methods for achieving this. The first involves a complex meditation in the form of a visualization on kuṇḍalinī, the second emphasizes knowing the distinction between the body and the self, while the third involves manipulation of the breath, kuṇḍalinī, and freeing the jīva or living being to enter other bodies. The entire passage is best translated in full, because all three methods discussed require entrance into other forms of matter, even if only the third is directly addressed as possession.



Śrī Vasiṣṭha said:

Listen to this correct description of the body of yogins becoming reduced to the size of an atom or greatly expanded. A spark [kaṇa] of fire, like a golden butterfly, a fragment of lightning flashing in an evening cloud, ignites above the sheath that holds the lotus cakra in the heart. It quickly expands due to the force of consciousness [saṃvitti], as if it were blown by a gust of wind. Now impelled by its form as consciousness [saṃvid], it moves like the rising sun. It has arrived in a moment, expanded, shining like the first ray of the rising sun on morning clouds; it makes the entire body melt, along with its limbs, as fire does to gold. This fire, which cannot bear the touch of water, desiccates the outer body down to the big toe. What remains is the subtle body in the form of the mind. Then, after shaking off this double body, it dissolves wherever it is as a result of the agitation of prāṇa. In this way it is like mist dissolving in the wind. Like a line of smoke rising from fire, the kuṇḍalinī energy [śakti], freed through the channel [nāḍi] rising from the energy center at the perineum [mūlādhāra], merges into the cosmic void [vyoman]. This citizen [nāgarī, viz. the kuṇḍalinī], like a puff of smoke, is a spectacle vibrating internally, enveloped by the ego sense [ahaṃkāra], which comprises the living being [jīva] constituted of the embrace of mind [manas] and intellect [buddhi]. She is capable of moving about at will, entering into [nir yāti] a lotus stalk, a mountain, grass, a wall, a rock, the sky, or the surface of the earth. She [kuṇḍalinī] alone becomes consciousness, establishing itself step by step, filled from beginning to end with its fluid essence [rasa]. Immersed in this essence, it becomes like a leather bag immersed in water. O Rāma, filled with such essence, this quickly assumes any desired shape; she places in the mind of an artist lines of a certain shape. Due to the influence of this resolute intention [dṛḍhabhāva] she develops an internal skeleton. Like a fetus growing inside a mother, this extremely subtle energy [śakti] becomes established in its own germinated sprout. O Rāghava, know this truth which has been formulated by the learned, that the energy of a living being [jīvaśakti] can constitute itself into anything, from Mt. Meru to a patch of grass. You have thus heard about the practice [sādhana] of reducing your size to that of an atom, etc., through the practice of yoga. Now hear my auspicious words on how this can be gained through knowledge [jñānasādhya].

Consciousness itself [cinmātram] as known here is one, pure, quiescent, devoid of any defining characteristic, subtler than the subtle, peaceful, and is neither the world nor actions within the world. As consciousness constructs the self with the self, a self in which will becomes expectant, the result is a living being [jīva] whose consciousness then becomes turgid [āvilatām] [with desire]. A jīva that is deluded as a result of confusion of will sees only the unreal, which is embedded in the physical, just as a boy sees a yakṣa in an [unmarked] object that is held up. When illumination truly arises as a result of [holding up] the lamp of knowledge, then the jīva’s delusion of will [saṅkalpamohaḥ] dissipates, like clouds in autumn. The sense of willfulness disappears as the body becomes quiescent, O Rāghava, just like the extinguished lamp when its oil runs out. Just as a being after waking from sleep no longer sees a dream, similarly, when this truth arises, the jīva will no longer see this body. When what is unreal is justified through an attitude that it is real, the jīva becomes firmly entrenched in the sense of the reality of the body. But due to the meditative experience [bhāvanā] of the singularity of reality, the disembodied (jīva) becomes gloriously happy. Indeed, superimposition of the reality of the self [ātmabhāvanam] on the body, etc., on that which is not the self, is as difficult to remove as is the intention to force sunbeams to remove the harshness of inertia. But when the experience of the self [ātmabhāva] is with the self alone, then consciousness itself [cinmātram] is revealed as all pervasive, stainless, and pure; through the sun of knowledge the sense of “I am” is destroyed. Others who have known the self meditate [ bhāvayanti] on it in such a way that they quickly see this reality through the intensity of this meditation [dṛdhabhāvanayā]. Nevertheless, O Rāghava, some foolish people, through the use of this kind of intense meditation, will convert poison into ambrosia and ambrosia into poison. In this way, it is often seen that whatever is meditated upon with intensity is quickly brought to bear. When the body is seen as a body, it is that alone which becomes real; but when it is seen with an attitude [bhāva] that it is unreal, then the body becomes a part of the atmosphere. O Rāma, you have heard about how to obtain abilities such as reducing the body to the size of an atom through utilizing knowledge. Now you, a good person, should hear about another method.

The jīva is lifted from the sheath [gṛham; lit. “house”] of the kuṇḍalinī through the yogic practice of breath retention after an exhalation [recaka]. It is then joined [within another body], as the fragrance of a flower carried by the wind. The body (of the yogin), its vibrations stopped [virataspandaḥ], becomes like wood or stone. He then submerges his jīva in the body, jīva, and mind of the other person, carefully, like sprinkling water on plants. The prepared jīva enters inside anything fixed or mobile, in order to enjoy that state according to his own desire. In this way the yogin enjoys the glory of siddhis. If it is still existent, the yogin then may reenter his own body, or he can enjoy that of another; either way, the body becomes resplendent. In this way, through an act of pervasion, a yogin, through any of these bodies, can fill all other reflected forms [bimbān], or he can establish himself completely by filling up the entire universe with consciousness [saṃvit]. The yogin then becomes the light of consciousness, master of himself, having known that which has eternally risen and is completely free of fault. O Rāma, he can obtain whatever he desires. They know this to be the real state of unobstructed bliss. (6.1.82.1–34)16

The first practice has the earmarks of a visualization practice. The power of consciousness itself activates the energy of kuṇḍalinī to assume or construct any shape desired by the yogin. All supernatural accomplishments or siddhis, including possession of another body, naturally results from this matrix of realization and practice. The second is the realization of siddhis through clarity of understanding of the nature of the relationship between body, consciousness, and intention. If the body is understood and experienced as unreal, the consciousness is liberated to achieve siddhi. The third practice is more specifically yogic in that it does not require the recognition of the body as unreal, but emphasizes the same elements of breath control and suffusion of the being itself, the jīva, in the body of another being, as mentioned by Hemacandra and the commentators on the YS.

Searching the literature for narrative examples of these practices does not yield much fruit, barring what we have already seen in the MBh. This is no doubt due in great measure to the normative thrust of Sanskrit literature about which we commented in Chapter 1. Most examples will be of divine or semidivine beings; they are rarely, as in the example from the Mahābhārata (MBh) of Vipula Bhārgava and Ruci, the wife of Devaśarman, of yogins. An example of possession among divine beings, which is nevertheless appropriate to this yogic context in which knowledge is gained through āveśa, is recounted in the Liṅga Purāṇa 1.17–20.17 In this story, sparked by a divine competitive instinct, the great deities Brahmā and Viṣṇu enter each other (pravistah, 1.20.20), taking turns, for several thousand years each time, viewing the universe from the other’s perspective. In the end, they honor each other, perceive each other’s greatness, and, after realizing the superiority of Śiva to both of them, decide to abandon their contest. In these two examples, āveśa qualifies as a vṛtti or fluctuation within the mind, in the first case because of the involuntary manner in which Purañjana entered into his state of darkness and in the second case because of the intentionality of the deities’ entrance into each other’s mental fields. Yet both are explicitly described as states of absorption. In its practical application, then, as these paradigmatic examples reveal, āveśa is an absorptive state in which a specific vṛtti is isolated, which distinguishes it from samādhi, a state of yogically induced absorption devoid of such vṛttis.18 It is stories like these, perhaps in addition to credible demonstrations by yoga practitioners, which unfortunately remain undocumented, that must have precipitated the inclusion of a sūtra on possession in the YS and in Hemacandra’s Yogaśāstra, though, of course, the narrative statements of practices in the later Yogavāsiṣṭha must stand apart as a summation of the late first-millennium convergence of Vedānta and yoga.

## Śaṇkara’s Possession of a Dead King
It is important now to return to the story of Śaṇkara and the deceased king. This is told in varying degrees of detail in the hagiographies of Śaṇkara life. Two may be cited here: the Śaṇkaradigvijaya (ŚDV) of Mādhava-Vidyāraṇya and the Śrīśaṅkaravijaya (ŚV) of Anantānandagiri.19 The former is much more expansive on the events of his personal life, which is densely imbued with the miraculous, while the latter is both more concise and diffuse, focusing more closely on Śaṇkara’s travels and debates. Both recount the tale of the great ācārya’s possession, which has become a standard narrative item in vedāntic circles. Both of these hagiographies were written several centuries after Śaṇkara’s life, which was probably in the early decades of the eighth century.20 Both abound with dialogue and brief frame stories and are often punctuated by commentary and analysis. From both accounts, it appears that Śaṇkara was in constant motion, traveling from place to place to debate—and defeat—exponents of countless other viewpoints (mata, darśana), from Buddhists to Jainas to Hindu sectarian leaders whose movements centered on the worship of particular deities, including Gaṇapati, Indra, and Yama, as well as exponents of astrology and worshippers of bhūtas, vetālas, and semidivine beings. Śaṇkara’s rebuttal to these teachers was usually a variation on the same theme: Their systems were invalid because they were not based on the authority of the Vedas. One of these systems was kāmaśāstra,21 systematic knowledge of human sexuality.

After finishing off Maṇḍana Miśra, the noted exponent of vedic orthodoxy,22 in debate (according to the hagiographies Śaṅkara later initiated him into saṃnyāsa), Śaṅkara was challenged by Maṇḍana’s learned wife, Ubhayabhāratī, as she is known in the ŚDV, or Sarasavāṇī, as she’s called in the ŚV. Her challenge was to prove his mastery of all branches of knowledge by demonstrating his erudition in kāmaśāstra. Śaṇkara could not refuse the challenge, but it put him in a predicament; he needed to avoid both defeat and embarrassment. He was forced to consider how to gain control of this branch of knowledge without compromising his hard-won celibacy (brahmacarya). He knew that mere textual study would not be enough; kāmaśāstra required practical as well as theoretical knowledge. In the end, Śaṇkara settled on a strategy of possession.

After learning, then double-checking, that a certain local king named Amaruka had died, he went to the edge of town and left his body, devoid of consciousness (citigataḥ), in the hollow of a boulder inside a cave. He saw to it that his inert body was guarded by his disciples and then used his yogic power to enter the body of the dead king through the brahmarandhra, the aperture in the crown of the head, with his subtle body (ŚV: liṅgaśarīra; ŚDV: ātivāhikaśarīra) and ego (ŚV: abhimānā).23 The ŚV provides a name for this special knowledge: parakāyapraveśavidyā (the art of possessing another’s body). Because the king rose from the dead, the texts continue, the kingdom was relieved and joyous, and sponsored tumultuous receptions and grand rituals, including anointing the king with a profusion of milk.

After the celebrations, the king proceeded to the bedchamber of the chief queen and experienced great pleasure, because he was, it is said, skilled in lovemaking (ŚV: ratikauśalāt)—an innate skill, it must be supposed, given Śaṅkara’s presumption of lifelong celibacy (though note the YS passage quoted above that states that one can possess another being “in order to enjoy according to its own desire whatever is desired by that being”).24 Nevertheless, he joined with his wife, her face with his, her chest with his, her navel with his, each of her parts joined with those of his, fondling her secret places (ŚV: kakṣāsthāneṣu) with his hands, with the confidence of a married man.25 A quick learner indeed! The queen was completely fooled. She knew the sexual arts, her husband’s love prattle, and only her husband’s body; she had no idea that he was no longer alive. In this way, Śaṇkara swiftly spread his power in all directions, wherever there were lifeless bodies (yatra kutra śarīrāṇi jīvahīnāni bhumiṣu)—presumably meaning that he practiced this art later as well, in other, temporarily appropriated bodies. After some time, both the ministers of the kingdom and Śaṇkara’s disciples became anxious, the ministers because the king was doing a much better job than before he “died,” and the disciples because Śaṇkara did not return within the one month he specified to them would be the maximum time he would be away from his body. The ministers guessed, correctly, that the dead king had been possessed and promulgated an edict that all lifeless bodies must be cremated immediately, both to avoid further incidents of possession and to discover the identity of the possessing agent, whose body would be reposing lifeless in a secret place.

Śaṇkara’s disciples, worried that their guru had been overcome by the delights of the good life and had fallen from the path, arranged to travel incognito to the court as musicians and play for him, thus coaxing his memory of the true dharma. In fact, they were correct; he was enjoying his life of wealth, power, and sex. Nevertheless, Śaṇkara had the good sense to grant these “musicians” an audience, and, after hearing them warble a tune that was little more than a poetic rendering of basic upaniṣadic theology replete with phrases like neti neti and tat tvam asi, he came to his senses. He realized he had had his fill of hands-on kāmaśāstra and immediately left the king’s body, “like a bird leaving a nest” (ŚV), before the guests assembled at the performance. He returned to his own body just in time—it had been discovered by the king’s minions, who had laid it on a pyre in accordance with the directive to burn all lifeless bodies. In fact, although the pyre had been lit, the flames had not yet reached the body when Śaṇkara arrived. Śaṇkara thus had enough time to bring it to life through the same process he had used to take possession of the king’s body. He then recited a special hymn intended to extinguish the fire. This became known to Ubhayabhāratī, though it is not stated exactly how or why she elected to believe it. Nevertheless, it was sufficient proof to her that Śaṇkara had mastered kāmaśāstra. Thus, the great ācārya’s quest for omniscience was complete.

But, as noted, he did not pay for it with the energy or purity of his own physical body. He employed procedures known within yoga traditions, which, as we have seen, were also known to Vipula Bhārgava, as well as to Hemacandra, which is to say to yoga traditions both within and beyond Hindu orthodoxy. It must also be noted that the language employed here for sexual merging in the ŚV is almost identical to that used in the MBh to describe Vipula’s tenaciously nonsexual possession of Ruci, suggesting that possession may share some of the physical attractions or ecstasies of sex, at least in certain cases. Finally, it is important to note that this kind of possession was apparently reserved for the learned, for the yogin who has undergone the proper training. Although such stories abound—another one is recounted in the next chapter—this kind of yogic possession cannot be considered part of a tradition of possession; rather, as stated, it is part of a tradition of yoga and a tradition of textuality. If it was ever more than a hagiographical instantiation of yogic lore, it was doubtless employed sparingly and apparently had little ritual apparatus, except as yoga practice itself qualifies as ritual; nor was it embraced in any popular or festival context. Thus, it is perhaps little more than a textual and narrative oddity, albeit one with a background of intertextuality and a foundation in the popular spiritual imagination.

## Possession and the Body in the Brahmasūtras
The final section of Bādarāyaṇa’s Brahmasūtras (BS) discusses the symptoms of enlightenment. One of the final sūtras in this section states that, just as the flame of a lamp “enters” (āveśaḥ) another wick, a liberated being can enter another body (pradīpavad āveśas tathā hi darśayati, BS 4.4.15). It will be of interest to examine the remarks of a few commentators on this sūtra. We first look at what is probably the oldest surviving commentary on the BS, that of Bhāskara, composed in the mid-seventh century, whose sectarian affiliation is unclear from this commentary. This is his sole surviving work. Then we examine the remarks of Śaṇkara, who wrote his advaita commentary about a century later. The next commentary to be briefly examined is that of Nimbārka, whose school is called bhedābheda (nondifference in difference) and whose date is disputed, but may have flourished in South India at about the same time as Śaṇkara.26 Then, we look at the Vaiṣṇava commentary by Rāmānuja, who penned his viśiṣṭādvaita (qualified nondualism) works in the eleventh or twelfth century. This is followed by a brief exploration of the Śaiva commentary by Śrīkaṇṭha of the thirteenth century and the subcommentaries by Appayya Dīkṣita on both Śaṇkara and Śrīkaṇṭha, written in the seventeenth century. Finally, we examine the śuddhādvaita (pure nondualism) commentary by the Vaiṣṇava sectarian founder Vallabhācārya written in the early decades of the sixteenth century. To all of them, the sūtra assumes a background in yoga: āveśa is clearly regarded by both the sūtrakāra and the bhāṣyakāras as a siddhi (perfection) attainable through yogic practice or as a consequence of liberation. Examining this material also sheds light on the relationship between the different sectarian and commentatorial traditions with little studied aspects of their yogic heritage.

Bhaskara’s commentary on this sūtra is perhaps the most incisive of all; indeed, one wishes his successors had followed his thought more conspicuously. He begins by stating that a liberated person may assume many constructed bodies (nirmāṇaśarīrāṇi bahāni) at will. He then wonders whether these bodies possess their own independent consciousness and mind. He answers in the negative, that these belong to the individual inhabiting the body enacting the āveśa. If we do not assume this, states his philosophical opponent (pūrvapakṣin), we fall into the trap that ensnared the followers of the Vaiśeṣika (vaiśeṣikamate): that these projected emanations of the mind of the liberated person, which seem to constitute the substance of āveśa, will no longer be under his or her power, that the creator of these constructed bodies may lose control of his or her creations.27 Bhāskara denies this possibility, suggesting that if this were the case we would encounter many more liberated people than we do. Conversely, experience is impossible for a body without consciousness or mind. Thus, the omnipotence (sarvaśaktitva) that defines this kind of āveśa occurs when the emanations of the consciousness and mind of a liberated person influence another still hopelessly embedded in saṃsāra. He adds, however, that this does not negate the possibility that the liberated person could create additional bodies and inhabit them with his consciousness and mind.

Śaṇkara, in his Brahmasūtrabhāṣya, begins his comments by citing the śruti passage, Chāndogya Upaniṣad (ChU) 7.16.2: “He is unitary, (yet) he becomes threefold, fivefold, sevenfold, ninefold.”28 This passage, Śaṇkara and several others contend, may be cited in support of the present sūtra, demonstrating the possibility of a single ātman proliferating within many bodies. Śaṇkara’s rebuttal of his pūrvapakṣin is that mind and ātman can be separated. Through an act of positive intentionality (satyasaṃkalpatvāt), a person can, through yogic means, create another body with a mind of its own in which the emanator then joins (yokṣyate) his own ātman. This, Śaṇkara says, is consistent with yogaśāstra, and, as the earlier discussion makes clear, he appears correct in this assessment.29 The ensuing discussion in the BS (4.4.16–18) addresses the nature of the special knowledge available to a liberated person. The implication of the sūtras, recognized by all the commentators, is that this knowledge is gained through siddhis, a category into which āveśa falls, but which stops short of the ability to create, maintain, and dissolve universes, tasks strictly reserved for the gods.30 The subcommentaries on Śaṇkara, including Vācaspatimiśra’s Bhāmatī and Appayya Dīkṣita’s Kalpataruparimala, explain that the all-pervasiveness (vyāptitva) of the knowledge of a liberated person allows that knowledge to spread in any direction, in any place, into the sense organs (indriya) and the internal psychic organ (antaḥkaraṇa) of embodied beings.

Although Nimbārka’s commentary on this sūtra is brief, the subcommentary Vedāntakaustubhaḥ by Śrīnīvāsācārya and a further commentary on Śrīnīvāsācārya’s, called Vedāntakaustubhaprabhā, by Keśavakāśmīrabhaṭṭa, fill in some of the gaps. Nimbārka states simply that, like the light of a flame, āveśa of an individual (jīva) into many bodies is possible through the acquisition of special knowledge of the natural order (jñānena dharmabhūtena) and cites Śvetāśvatāra Upaniṣad 5.9 as his vedic authority (śruti). The Upaniṣad verse reads: “When the tip of a hair is split into a hundred parts, and one of those parts further into a hundred parts—the individual soul [jīva], on the one hand, is the size of one such part, and, on the other, it partakes of infinity.”31 Although the interpretation Nimbārka intends to impose on this text is clear—that the imperceptible and infinitely small jīva has the capacity to become all-pervasive and claim other bodies as part of its omnipresent domain—the commentators refine this interpretation and give it additional dimensions. Śrīnīvāsācārya notes that this is possible only for one who is liberated (mukta), while Keśavakāśmīrabhaṭṭa adds that the special knowledge referred to recognizes the distinction between the bound jīva and the liberated one. The enjoyment of the bound jīva is controlled by the dictates of karma, and this prevents such a jīva from expanding or moving beyond the boundaries of a single body. By contrast, the liberated jīva, free from the constraints of karma, has his or her own will supported by the will of the Supreme Lord (paramātman). Implicitly, then, if the liberated individual desires to possess another body, that desire is quite naturally manifested.

The twelfth-century philosopher of viśiṣṭādvaita (qualified nondualism), Rāmānuja, presents a lengthy discourse on the relationship between the body and the Lord in his commentary on BS 1.1.3. This sūtra reads śāstra-yonitvāt, expressing the idea that the only means of knowing brahman is śāstra, the testimony of sacred text. The relevant part of Rāmānuja’s argument begins with the proposition of the pūrvapakṣin that “bodies, the world, etc., are effects” (tanubhuvanādikāryam), indicating a material cause (upādānakāraṇam) that must be manipulated by a more remote, intelligent causal agent (nimittakāraṇam) capable of comprehending the complexity of the effect (kārya, vastu). For example, a potter has the skill and knowledge to produce clay pots. Or, continues the pūrvapakṣin, if the created item in question bears a greater degree of complexity, such as a palace, we must infer that it was produced by an individual with appropriately diverse knowledge and skills. Similarly, if human bodies and worlds are the visible effects in question, we must infer that the producer is a special being (puruṣaviśeṣāḥ) with much greater insight, namely, Īśvara, the generic term for an omniscient god. From the limited power of our own observation, we know that humans do not have this ability. So, we must infer that only a special being with majesty (aiśvarya), and so forth, could possess the knowledge and skill to produce the visible world. Thus, asserts the pūrvapakṣin, through inference (anumāna) we can know of this special being, this Īśvara; we do not need to resort to śāstra alone for this knowledge.

The pūrvapakṣin entertains some doubt regarding his own assertion, that potters produce pots using tools like sticks and wheels that are guided by their bodies. But, because Īśvara is bodiless, states this secondary objector, he cannot direct the processes of physical causation. The preferred doctrine (siddhānta), counters the primary pūrvapakṣin, is that bodies are not always necessary to bring about observable effects. For example, he states, it is our experience that a spirit (bhūta), a vampire (vetāla), snake poison (garala), and other substances can be destroyed or driven away by intention alone. Thus, Īśvara, though bodiless, is capable of impelling and guiding other objects; intentionality, he says unambiguously, is not dependent on a body (na śarīrāpekṣāḥ sankalpah). He continues that mind alone is responsible for intention (mana eva hi saṅkalpahetuḥ), and both mind and intentionality are well within the province of Īśvara. The pūrvapakṣin fields another secondary objection, namely, that if intentionality, which guides causation, is dependent on mind, then only embodied beings have the ability to create, to engender causation, because mind is possible only with embodiment. He replies that mind (manas) is eternal (nitya) and, by its very nature, can be in many places and thus may be separated from the body. In the end, the pūrvapakṣin argues, there are no limits to inference.32

This argument is countered by Rāmānuja’s own position (siddhānta), which asserts that under no circumstance can we infer a creator deity, embodied, bodiless from the outset, or disembodied. The logical reasons for this are legion, and Rāmānuja admirably brings all of these into his argument. It is not necessary for our purposes to discuss these reasons in detail, except to say that, after marshalling the arguments for his final views, Rāmānuja is left with no recourse but to appeal to the authority of śāstra, which informs us of this altogether transcendent Īśvara that is beyond the possibilities of limitation implicit in beings known through other means of apprehension (pramāṇa), including inference. Among these passages from śāstra are those given in Chapter 5, which state that brahman entered the inert universe, then embodied and enlivened beings that he himself created. Thus, Īśvara is qualitatively different even from liberated (mukta) beings, who, says Rāmānuja on BS 4.4.15, can extend their influence far and wide and create or possess as many bodies as they like. The liberated individual may invoke intention and thus manipulate the bodies for specified purposes that he or she creates and possesses. This kind of micromanagement through possession, however, is outside the interests of Īśvara, whose possession, ab origine, can be known only through sastra.

Appayya Dīkṣita (1554–1626) wrote a second, insufficiently studied, commentary on the BS called Śivārkamaṇidīpikā, in which he has more to say on the subject. This text, like his Kalpataruparimala, is actually a sub-commentary, though one with a much more pronounced sectarian bias than the Kalpataruparimala. The Śivārkamaṇidīpikā comments rather freely on the Brahmasūtrabhāṣyam of the lesser-known Śrīkaṇṭha (possibly of the thirteenth century), who also provides a distinctly Śaiva interpretation to the sūtras. Śrīkaṇṭha points out that a liberated person has the ability to fully possess an infinite number of bodies according to his will (svecchayānantaśarīraparigrahaṇasāmarthya). Like the other commentators on this sūtra, Śrīkaṇṭha states that a liberated person may be all-pervasive, that consciousness is not inherently limited to a single body, a view he attributes to the pūrvapakṣin. Like Śaṅkara, Śrīkaṇṭha and Appayya Dīkṣita cite ChU 7.16.2 as a sruti that proves that occupation of a body is not necessarily serial, but can occur simultaneously in more than one body. Śrīkaṇṭha states that, at least according to the present sutra, āvesa indicates a pervasion in the same sense that the light from a lamp pervades a house with its brightness.33 He then enters into a lengthy discussion of the meaning of deva in the word “Mahādeva,” the primary name of Śiva. This, he states, drawing on the proper etymology of the word, indicates the heavens, and, like Mahādeva, the liberated being is fully capable of exercising pervasiveness, wandering the heavens.

Vallabhācārya’s Aṇubhāṣya on this sūtra (the final section penned posthumously by his son Viṭṭhalanāthajī) represents a very different—and decidedly devotional—vision of the BS. He cites a passage from the Taittirīya Āraṇyaka as the authority for this sūtra: “[Just as] the husband, being the provider, supports [the family], the one god [eko devaḥ] entered into [ni√viś] the many.”34 Vallabhācārya interprets this sūtra to mean that the Lord himself (Kṛṣṇa) enters into the devotee, thus allowing the latter to enjoy the pleasures of the Lord’s līlās, just as the light from the newly ignited lamp functions like that of the old lamp and flame. One cannot enjoy this state through natural knowledge and actions, but only when Bhagavān possesses the individual.35 Regardless of who is “right” in the interpretation of this sūtra, the point for our purposes is that āvesa as used here is close to the usage in YS 3.38 and indicates benevolent possession.

Most scholars regard the BS as a product of the few centuries surrounding the turn of the Common Era, predating the YS, whose heavy Buddhist influence places it in all probability a few centuries later. But it is not certain whether in this instance the BS directly influenced the YS or whether āveśa was simply one among the many well-known esoteric arts which sūtra- and bhāṣyakāras felt obliged to recognize and incorporate into their works. In any case, āvesa remained part of the textuality of Vedānta throughout its history, as evidenced in the sixteenth-century Vedantasara, a primer intended for beginning students of the Vedānta sastra. This text speaks of the entry (praviṣṭatva) of caitanya (intelligence or consciousness),36 otherwise called visva, into the gross body without losing its orientation in the subtle body.37 We cannot neglect to mention that āveśa as it appears in this sūtra fits more closely the general semantic shape of (anu)praveśa than the usual sense of āvesa, a fact that the commentators implicitly understood. The possession considered here is instigated externally and is characterized by a kind of substantiality, a mass or density that confers a physicality that is often lacking in āveśa, but present in praveśa. Mind (manas) and consciousness (cetana, caitanya), here the property of the possessor, a presumed yogin (whether liberated or not), are assigned both mass and mobility. This is consistent with data from elsewhere in Indic textuality as well as the anthropological record: These are regarded as substances, whether their weight is coded, symbolic, or physical.

## Possession in Indian and Tibetan Buddhism
In spite of an official absence of an inherently existent self in Buddhism, personhood nonetheless persists, as discussed earlier. As Gombrich has remarked, “the anatta doctrine has no more affective immediacy with regard to the next life than with regard to this.”38 In practice, the person in Sinhala Buddhism, the topic of Gombrich’s appraisal, is as porous as any other in South Asia, as the work of Gombrich, Kapferer, and others testifies.39 To further demonstrate the extent of this porousness, it is instructive to examine briefly some of the lexical evidence of possession in Indian and Tibetan Buddhist texts.

Possession is noted, if not actively discussed, in the earlier strata of Buddhist literature. Although verbal and derivative forms of ā√viś are rarely encountered in the Pāli canon,40 the Mahāsutasoma Jātaka has bhūtapaviṭṭho (Skt. bhūtapraviṣṭaḥ; possessed by a spirit), and the Padakusalamāṇava Jātaka contains the expression “possessed by non-humans” (amanussapariggahītā [Skt. amanuṣya-parigṛhītā]).41 More significant is the Sanskrit phrase ātmabhāvaparigraham (taking possession of a [new] personal existence), appearing as a commentatorial gloss on the word nivesanam in verses 33–34 of the Paramārthagāthās. In a long discussion of this problematic phrase, Lambert Schmithausen concludes that it indicates a tacit assent to entering into a new “life-experience” (ātmabhāva), which is to say a rebirth (thus confirming Gombrich’s observation about the affectivity of the anatta doctrine on future births).42 Schmithausen translates verse 34 as: “[t]hat which has been stuck to [nivesanam] [by them], that the Noble Ones know to be suffering.”43 Niveśanam, infelicitously translated “stuck to,” is related to the sense of the term saṃsārāveśa (immersed in the cycle of rebirth), used in several Hindu devotional texts (see Chapter 9). The emotional weight that we have seen as a significator of āvesa is present in the description of the Buddha’s speech in the Pali Mahāvastu, where it is, in part, called āviṣṭhaṃ (penetrating).44

The great Pāli dictionary by Trenckner et al. lists several references to the verb āvisati, including Digha Nikāya 3.204.17: “This yakṣa seizes, this yakṣa possesses” (ayaṃ yakkho gaṇhati ayaṃ yakkho āvisati). It is striking that both √gṛh and ā√viś are used here, probably for emphasis. In this and several other passages, ā√viś appears in the sense of uninvited possession of the type generally associated with pra√viś in Sanskrit.45 In Buddhism, the yakṣa occasionally supplants the more brahmanical gandharva, and with greater negative consequences.46 In his Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Dictionary, Franklin Edgerton cites the Lalitavistara (163.14): āveśād … jinottamānām … adhiṣṭhānena (by the supernatural power of the Buddhas; though he adds that this could mean “because of entrance, possession, on the part of the Buddhas”).47 A later Mahāyāna text, Kṣemendra’s Bodhisattvāvadānakalpalatā (56–57) says: “Saṃyatā, inspirited by a deity [devatāviṣṭaḥ], spoke to him: ‘My Lord, in the world only the enlightened Buddha, engaged in completely eradicating the afflictions of human beings [and] possessing discriminating awareness [and] determination produced from passionlessness, are calm due to peace and contentment.’”48

The situation is more complicated in Tibetan Buddhist texts. The Sanskrit word āveśa is translated in classical Tibetan as lha-babs, which, like āvesa and its variants, is used colloquially, beyond the classical texts.49 The Tibetan gronds-jug is used for forceful entry, roughly corresponding with praveśa, while bzung-ba is close to the Sanskrit grahaṇa.50 Thus, the distinctions between āveśa, praveśa, and grahaṇa are preserved in Tibetan. The primary contexts in which the two former terms are employed are the ritual of introducing, or generating, a deity into an image, corresponding to the Sanskrit prāṇapratiṣṭha (cf. Chapter 10) and conducting one or more deities into an individual through a process of visualization, also called nyāsa. The former, the presence of a deity in an icon or Tantric initiate, is called jñānasattva and the latter, the visualized or generated deity, is called samayasattva.51

Tibetan spirit-mediums (dpa’-bo and lha-pa), formally classified as dharmapālas (guardians of dharma) “are very much part of the folk-religion complex, and there is every reason to assume that they go back to pre-Buddhist times. [But] they are well integrated into the Buddhist religious system, and a number of them reside in monastic temples or gompas and are ordained monks.”52 This presupposes the assumption of full identity of a dharmapāla with a monk, a complete and seemingly permanent possession of a monk by a divine or semidivine being, or the grafting of certain divine qualities associated with dharmapālas onto monks with particular qualifications (Skt. adhikāra). This does not mean, however, that the actions of living dharmapālas are beyond question, because some of the Tibetan Buddhist traditions that accept the possibility and validity of possession states also have a history of skepticism toward it.

The textual bases for the institutionalization of possession in Tibetan Buddhism are difficult to locate beyond the realm of noncanonical tantric texts, many of which are lost or remain unedited, but which we know have affinities with non-Buddhist Tantras from the Indian Himalayas. Some of this material, which is part of an extensive genre of ritual texts that addresses oracular possession, is discussed in Chapter 11. However, we can identify a manifestly eclectic religious complex in which oracular possession is domesticated through ritual, and which appears almost entirely in ritual and (auto-)biographical literature. Thus, Tibetan Buddhist textuality does not sequester the public culture of possession from either descriptions of its mechanics or from theorizing about it, as occurs in most brahmanical literature. Possession is discussed, however, in the Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālasaṃvara, an eighth-century text extant only in Tibetan. This text, which David Gray claims “is probably the earliest of the Yoginī tantras,”53 currently exists only in manuscript form. Gray asserts that the Tibetan dbab pa, a derivative of the verb ’bebs pa (to cause to descend), is the Tibetan translation of the Sanskrit āvesa. The Tibetan term, he says, “does not refer to spirit possession per se, but rather the employment of dance to invoke the deity, with whom the practitioner seeks some sort of union in order to achieve the magical powers or siddhis which that deity can bestow.”54 Gray argues that this is not a kind of deity possession in which the practitioner loses consciousness of his or her own identity. On the contrary, it “seems to call for a state of union with the deity that leads to a heightened rather than an occluded state of consciousness.”55 What Gray writes here is consistent with descriptions of shamanic trance. He concludes that Vajrayāna visualization practices had their origin in earlier possession practices.56

The state oracle of Tibet, an important and well-known public figure who hails from the Nechung monastery, near Lhasa, is a good example of a dpa’-bo. Since at least the sixteenth century he has served, in succeeding generations, as a close adviser to the Dalai Lamas. His advice comes through ritualized and highly predictable possession states.57 As a figure whose considerable temporal power arises from his skill at inducing possession states, he does not require strained attempts by the government to justify his position near the center of power in Tibet or in the present-day Tibetan government in exile. The textuality of possession has assured his position. Thus, the oracle does not exist in isolation but is supported by much older, widely distributed possession cults that share a common Buddhist, Himalayan, and Central Asian public and spiritual heritage.

Among the sects of Tibetan Buddhism, the oldest, the Nyingma school, incorporates in its literature a substantial body of noncanonical tantric texts, serving as the primary venue for the narrativization of possession. Much of this echoes historical writing, because it appears in non- or semihagiographical biography or even in autobiography, genres that are sadly deficient in Sanskrit literature. This material, which has been the subject of scholarship only in recent years, is dealt with below, in the course of more detailed discussions of possession as represented in tantric texts. Suffice to say here that these texts bear some of the excitement of ethnography, of thick description. Several reasons may be cited for this, one of which is that they contain elements of criticism and doubt with respect to the experience of possession.58

What is most relevant in the current chapter, however, is to address possession as it appears in doctrinal literature, which in both South Asia and Tibet includes technical manuals on yoga, sometimes presented as formal dialectical argument. One such manual, the Bhāvanākrama (BhK, Stages of Meditation), composed in Sanskrit by the Indian monk and scholiast Kamalaśīla in the late eighth century, bears semantic similarities to texts of classical yoga.59 This text has been relied on by Tibetan Buddhists for centuries, up to the present. It contains three chapters, of which two—the first and third—survive relatively intact in Sanskrit, while the Sanskrit of the second chapter is almost entirely lost. However, a Tibetan translation of the complete work was made quite early, and that survives. The first chapter outlines the goals of Buddhist practice, the second describes the practice, and the third describes the results. The key chapter for our purposes is the second, of which a “restored” Sanskrit text was composed in the twentieth century.60

All three chapters of the text describe a gradualist position in terms of a number of stages of meditation practice. On the one hand, one can argue that the Buddha achieved enlightenment suddenly in one night’s ecstatic experience under a bodhi tree. On the other hand, one can point out that this experience was preceded by performance of considerable austerities and cultivation of mental discipline and that major sections of the Sutta Piṭaka describe stages of this highly contextualized enlightenment experience. What is relevant here is that Kamalaśīla describes the practice of meditation in the familiar language of engrossment, including āveśa. The first section of the BhK states that an aspirant on the path must eventually transcend the notions that substances and qualities possess any kind of true nature (sarvadharmaniḥsvabhāvatā) and that nondual experience should be a soteriological goal. Then, after becoming absorbed in the highest truth (paramatattvapraveśāt), the aspirant enters into absorption without options, choices, or the possibilities of construction or representation (nirvikalpasamādhipraveśaḥ). In this way, one becomes established in the supreme truth and “sees” (sa paśyati) Mahāyāna.61 The use of praveśa here is, of course, conventional, but it also suggests a dualism akin to that found in the Upaniṣad: that substantialities or states, regardless of their relation to the perceiver—whether they are self-created (e.g., by Brahmā) or incidental—or whether they are real, unreal, illusory, or mere constructions, are (at least conventionally) separate from the cognizer and may be entered or possessed, resulting in a state of full identity, or, perhaps better, nondifferentiation. “Seeing” Mahāyāna, then, is much like yogic or folk possession, in which, for example, seeing the Goddess is tantamount to seeing through the eyes of the Goddess. In the BhK, nirvikalpasamādhi is not just a state in which the cognizer sees Mahāyāna, but one in which Mahāyāna sees itself. BhK part 3 describes this identity slightly differently: “One who [understands his] nature as an absence of personhood [pudgaladharmanairātmyām] has crossed over to the truth.”62

The second chapter of the BhK is filled with terms of experience that suggest an affinity with the language, and doubtless the ethos, of late first-millennium Indic devotion. This is the language of bhāva, bhāvanā, and other derivatives of the verbal root √bhū (to become). Bhāva indicates a mood, an attitude, or a state of being (avasthā), while bhāvanā indicates an experiential mode, usually a meditative state, uses to which we have seen these words put in the Hindu Yogavāsiṣṭha above.63 These terms are discussed more fully below when addressing possession as a mode of devotion; it is important here to note that they are closely associated with āveśa in bhakti texts and praveśa in Buddhism. One passage in the BhK liberally employs the terms praveśa and bhāvanā: “After the appearance of that knowledge, one enters into it [praveśaḥ] directly.” This refers to the knowledge gained from the practice of the stages of meditation. “Then, after entering [praviśya] into the first stage, one should next resort to the path of meditation [bhāvanāmārge] in which the stages on the path of meditation [bhāvanākrama] consist of wisdom [prajñā] meditation and method [upāya] meditation. This should be achieved by both transcendence of the world [lokottara] and knowledge gained in its aftermath. Because of purification of the subtlest obstructions that have accumulated because of not practicing meditation [bhāvanāpraheya], one will obtain the highest unique attributes [guṇa]. By purifying the lower stages one is possessed of [praviśya] the knowledge of the tathāgatas, crosses over the ocean of omniscience, and completely fulfills one’s goals.”64

Several other passages referring to meditative states or practices may be noted. One passage speaks of maitrībhāvanā (love or friendliness as a practice), performed with the wish that all beings achieve happiness (bodhicitta).65 In another, Kamalaśīla cites the Ratnamegha Sūtra on entering a noncontingent, signless (nirnimitta) state of yoga. He remarks that “thoughtful reflection is the preparation for entering into this state of noncontingency [nirnimittatāpraveśam].”66 In another passage, the BhK states, “when one sees that the mind is not fully engaged, one should realize the benefits of samādhi, then cause the mind to become [bhāvayet] engaged.”67 The BhK recommends a balance between the practice of alert and active insight (vipaśyanā) and the practice of tranquility or quiescence (śamatha): “When one embarks on both equally, then one should remain in that state without embellishing it, so long as there is no physical or mental discomfort.”68 In fact, the main point of the BhK is that both prajñā (wisdom) and upāya (practice), as well as vipaśyanā and śamatha, are necessary for attaining enlightenment. Kamalaśīla quotes the Ratnakūṭa to the effect that one cannot become absorbed into nirvāṇa (nirvāṇapraveśaḥ) through cultivation of emptiness alone.69 It requires a well-rounded approach.

## Conclusions
Despite the preceding discussions, it must be stated that possession was barely a blip on the philosophical screen in India. It was not problematized or thematized on its own merit, and when it was addressed at all it was out of necessity, because the authors of earlier texts mentioned it. When it was regarded categorically (as has always been the wont of Indian sastra), as it was in the Yogasūtras and Brahmasūtras, possession was assigned fuzzy ontological or soteriological characteristics rather than epistemological ones (perhaps Hemacandra and the Yogavāsiṣṭha aside). It lay within the realm of active human experience, an area prone to ontological and soteriological categorization. It was not presented as a topic germane for philosophical analysis in part because it was not considered empirically reproducible. Thus it was not a philosophical notion that could even awkwardly be assigned its own niche in philosophical composition. In this way, it lay at the periphery of such discourse, which, at least within the advancing genre of sastra, employed soteriology only as a framing device within which philosophers could address more pressing epistemological symmetries. But, as elsewhere in Indian literature, it forced its way in asymmetrically, haphazardly. Neither Yoga, Vedānta, Jainism, or Buddhism could easily discard the realm of human experience from their discourse, dealing as they purported to with notions of enlightenment or, more precisely, release from individually forged bondage to the nettlesome and ever-recurring phenomenal world.

Thus, systematic philosophy could not successfully escape responding to the individual; failure to do so would have constituted an egregious ethical oversight, even for systems in which ethics was not central (yet into which one can read an assumed ethics into the texts).70 And, as noted here, this was largely because the foundational texts forced them to examine the individual. In this way, the discourse of systematic philosophy was unable to escape its full commitment to responding to foundational texts—in the present cases the Brahmasūtras, Upaniṣads, Yogasūtras, and early Buddhist texts. These early texts forced generations of philosophers into the realm of questions regarding personal identity and possibility, at least occasionally, and away from totalizing concerns with the more remote abstractions that were the tools of their trade. In this way, philosophers could not expunge possession from their textuality, much less, we expect, from the religious and cultural worldviews that undergirded them. Hence, they exploited possession (as well as certain other phenomenological issues within the religious domain) only to the extent that it could shed light on other, more central, issues, such as the nature of mind, the relationship between mind, body and experience, and the nature of suffering.

What interceded to bring the worlds of human concern and philosophical analysis more closely together was the inescapable narrativity of religious culture. Śaṅkara the possessor of the dead king Amaruka impinged on the life—and inevitably the reception of the work—of Śaṅkara the philosopher, while Padmasambhava the tantric exorcist impinged on the careers of the theoreticians Śāntarakṣita and Kamalaśīla. The former—in both cases—provided working space for the latter. Regardless of whether we accept the hagiographies at their word (and we are in no position to do so), Śaṅkara’s (purported) possession and Padmasambhava’s (purported) exorcisms doubtless contributed to their public cachet; and even if these stories were conceived and circulated only after their deaths, both appear to have been sufficiently powerful figures in their own time for these or similar legends to arise and contribute to a popular groundswell of support for them. Possession and exorcism, at least according to religious narrative, proved to be strategies as effective for gaining knowledge as was the study of philosophy (vide Śaṅkara’s acquisition of kāmaśāstra). Furthermore, it is likely that neither Śaṅkara nor Padmasambhava would hesitate to employ religious, which is to say yogic or tantric, means for propagating their philosophical doctrines. This is an old strategy in India, going back to the Brāhmaṇas, Upaniṣads, MBh, and early Buddhist texts. We have also seen that neither Patañjali nor Hemacandra felt any contradiction between extreme religious practice and mainstream philosophical discourse. Possession and exorcism, accepting for the moment their facticity, or at least the facticity of their demonstrations and the public culture supporting them, was doubtless regarded as radical or extreme. And it is no secret in either classical or contemporary South Asia that philosophers, religious leaders, and other members of the literati have embraced, even encouraged, extreme practices, even if it is usually off the record, so to speak. Extremism would include possession, most other yogic siddhis, difficult austerities undertaken in jungles, left-handed (vāmācāra) or Pāsupata practices, and so on, that captured the imagination, practices that people would not want members of their own family to perform but that were culturally reconciled by their inclusion in authoritative texts. It was permitted, even encouraged, to imagine and think about these things and attribute them to great teachers, even if their practice was at the outer limits of social and spiritual acceptability. The letter of the law was rarely the rule within the ashram; the cloistered life, even if lived openly in the spirit of brahmanical restraint, embraced elements of transgressiveness and active imagination. What could be normative in literature—for example, possession, asceticism, or starvation—was surely extreme or radical in the world. Thus brahmans and Jainas could map out strategies for possession that did not contradict their philosophical or ethical principles.

A tradition of long standing in India is that teachers within all lineages of practice (meditation, yoga, etc.) invariably strive to locate their practices in established texts. We might label this “religion in search of a philosophy,” and rarely if ever have lineage holders or isolated charismatic teachers been short on justification for their often idiosyncratic or self-revealed teachings or practices. Thus, philosophers did not reject out of hand the practice of possession as strongly as the caricature of orthodoxy might suggest; rather, they selectively or passively advocated certain practices that did not blatantly contravene their ideas. Both brahmanical and Buddhist doctrinal traditions embrace a multivocality that, in the words of Todd Lewis, “highlight the problematic historical method of relying on the voices of ascetic monks and nuns to understand how the faith informed an ethos of living in the world as a ‘good Buddhist”71 (or a good Hindu). Thus the YS precedes the sūtra on possession with a simple, if ambiguous, warning: “These powers [vibhūti] are obstructions to samādhi but accomplishments when the mind is active.”72 The YS does not condemn these practices but, rather, recommends them in selective situations. Śaṅkara and others recorded only their ontologies and epistemologies, stating that practice must be based on the Upaniṣads, Buddhist texts, and so on. But they rarely described forbidden practices. They knew that their philosophical ideas emerged from the richness of life experience and, in turn, encouraged experiential experimentation, at least up to a point.73 No Indian philosopher composed an odium theologicum against possession or any other specific practice, as did Christian theologians and missionaries.

This may be further seen in the diction of experience, especially in the use of the verb bhu in all its senses of “becoming.” What is perhaps surprising to students of Indic religion is how ubiquitously this terminology is employed in Buddhist texts of the second half of the first millennium C.E. What this suggests is that Buddhism included a strong devotional component, while bhakti included a formal meditational component. Both of these, of course, are well known; for example, the Bhāvanākrama cites the Sarvadharmasaṃgrahavaipulya Sūtra on the necessity of a diversity of practices that have already inscribed in them a strong, if often unstated, devotional component.74 Conversely, many bhakti texts define standards of devotion specifically while assuming a diversity of practices that develop different experiential modes.75 I suspect that the identity of idiom indicates that there was a connection, even a reciprocity, between them in ways that have been hitherto unexplored. In any event, what this discussion demonstrates is a carefully constructed juxtaposition between the realms of the individual in the world of relationships, which includes possession as a mode of relation in the private world of the individual, a connection between the spheres of practice and theory that is closer than has been recognized.76

## NOTES
1. See Kelly 1998:173, and especially 188n6 on the problematic word Bewußtsein, probably better as “awareness” than “consciousness,” though Kelly himself has “reluctantly chosen the traditional term.” See my remarks in Chapter 1 on the use of the word “consciousness.”
2. For the problems surrounding this, see Clarke 1997:112ff.
3. Or, as Bloomfield writes, “penetration of one’s mind-stuff into the body of another” (1917:1). Cf. Caraka Saṃhitā, Śarīrasthānam 1.140, where āveśa is mentioned as one of the eight siddhis, and Bloomfield 1917:6, for other references. See also White 2004 on the sūtras discussed here.
4. Nāḍis are regarded as the scaffolding of the subtle body. Many nāḍis are believed to bear extraordinary power, if properly developed. For example, Ramakrishna “speaks of a special ‘memory nerve’ that develops after twelve years of celibacy. With such a nerve, the intellect develops and can comprehend God” (Kripal 1995:338n32). Elsewhere Ramakrishna says the “memory nerve” (medhā nāṛī) develops after holding semen for seven years (ibid.:67).
5. This commentary that is well worth studying has thus far received virtually no scholarly attention. The only edition of the Yogasiddhāntacandrikā appeared in 1911.
6. ghaṇṭābhighātatulyasya dedīpyamānāṇgārarāśidyuticañcalasya manaso ’pratiṣṭhasya śarīre karmāśayād bandhaḥ pratiṣṭhā.
7. Hara also suggests that “the object of entering is the seat of emotion, such as the mind [mānasa, citta] or heart [hṛdaya]” (1979a:263).
8. kāyarūpasaṃyamāt tadgrāhyaśaktistambhe cakṣuprakāśāsaṃprayoge ’ntardhānam | Trans. Rukmani 1987:102.
9. baleṣu hastibalādīni |
10. pravṛttyālokanyāsāt sūkṣmavyavahitaviprakṛṣṭajñānam | Trans. Rukmani 1987:108.
11. bhuvanajñānaṃ sūrye saṃyamāt |
12. tad evārthamātranirbhāsaṃ svarūpaśūnyam iva samādhiḥ; cf. YS 1.43, which regards this state as nirvitarka samādhi, in which conceptualization ceases and memory is purified (smṛtipariśuddhau).
13. YS 1.41: kṣīṇavṛtter abhijātasyeva maṇer grahitṛgrahaṇagrāhyeṣu tatsthatadañjanasthā samāpattiḥ (Samāpatti or “absorption” arises when the fluctuations [of the mind] are weakened, when [the mind] appears as a transparent jewel, assuming the features of the state on which it rests, which includes the cognizer, the cognition itself, and the object cognized).
14. See, e.g., Silburn 1988:133.
15. Hemacandra is not speaking as a lone voice in Jainism. Cf. Merutuṅga’s Prabandhacintāmaṇi, p. 12:parapurapraveśa; also Pārśvanāthacaritra 1.576, 3.119. Hemacandra is regarded as a great siddha by the Jain tradition: It is said that he defeated another Jain, Devabodhi, in debate by floating in the air and manifesting the entire Jain pantheon and all the ancestors of King Kumārapāla; cf. Bloomfield 1917:2.
16. See also a verse from the previous chapter of the Yogavāsiṣṭha, 6.1.81.56: “When the prāṇa is led into a state of stability for some time by engaging the practice of holding the breath at the end of an exhalation at the distance of twelve finger-breadths from the mouth, one can enter [praviśati] into the body of another person.”
17. Cited by Eck 1993:71–72.
18. See Arya 1986:373 for the view cited in Nāgojī Bhaṭṭa’s commentary Bṛhatī that samāpatti is a vṛtti.
19. On the Śaṅkara hagiographies, see Vidyasankar 2000. Bloomfield briefly describes the account in the Hindi Bhaktamāl (1917:10–11, through a French summary), which he erroneously refers to as the Bhaktimāl. This is clearly based on the Sanskrit hagiographies, to which Bloomfield, apparently, did not have access.
20. Cf. Mayeda 1999:3 and notes.
21. Cf. ŚDV 9.100: anaṅgaśāstra; 10.17: kandarpaśāstra.
22. Maṇḍana authored several major works of advaita (Brahmasiddhi), pūrvamīmāṃsā (Vidhiviveka, Bhāvanāviveka, etc.), and philosophy of grammar (Sphoṭasiddhi). It is likely that Maṇḍana lived slightly before Śaṅkara; cf. Thrasher 1979; and Raja 1991.
23. ŚV, p. 179: liṇgaśarīramātreṇa ca sābhimānī (jīvaḥ) citigato nṛpakalevaraniṣṭhabrahmarandhraṃ prāviśat |. ŚDV 9. 104cd: mahipasya varṣma guruyogabalo ’viśad ātivāhikaśarīrayutaḥ || The word guruyoga refers to Yogaśāstra. The next verse reads: aṇguṣṭham ārabhya samīraṇaṃ nayan karandhramārgād bahir etya yogavit | karandhramārgeṇa śanaiḥ praviṣṭavān mṛtasya yāvac caraṇāgram ekadhīḥ ||. karandhra is the same as brahmarandhra (Ka = Prajāpati or Brahmā). He carefully (śanaiḥ) entered (praviṣṭavān) the body of the king up to the toes (yāvac caraṇāgram).
24. On Śaṅkara’s argument in his commentary on the Bhagavadgītā that only brahmcārins, and brahmans at that, are eligible for liberation, see Nelson 1993.
25. mukhaṃ mukhena saṃyojya vakṣo vakṣojayos tathā | nābhyā nābhiś ca saṃkocya saṃkocena padāpadam || evam ekāṇgavat krtvā gāḍhāliṇganatatparaḥ | kakṣāsthāneṣu hastābhyāṃ spṛśan prauḍha ivābabhau || (ŚV, ibid.). The ŚDV, a more poetically accomplished text, provides a much grander rendering of his amorous loveplay and the coquettish behavior of the king’s many wives (ŚDV 10.12–16).
26. The recent publication in four large (and largely exemplary) volumes of Nimbārka’s commentary on BS with three commentaries and thirteen helpful appendices should vastly enhance future work on this little-studied commentator and Vaiṣṇava sectarian founder. Cf. Brahmasūtranimbārkabhāṣyam (2000).
27. I am unable to find any reference to this in the Vaiśeṣika. The nearest reference is Udayana’s Nyāyakusumāñjali (NKus) 230–8 (III), 239–6 (III): bhāvāveśāc ca cetasaḥ, referring to the absorption of consciousness in being. On the notion of bhāva in Vaiśeṣika, see Halbfass 1992:139ff . Cf. also Chemparathy 1972:93. In discussing proofs for the existence of Īśvara, Udayana comments on āviśya in Bhagavadgītā 15.17: the “āveśa or ‘permeation’ through which the Supreme Self ‘supports’ the triple world, as ‘the conjunction with a being that has cognition, desire, and effort’” (jñānacikīrṣāprayatnavataḥ saṃyogaḥ); cf. NKus 506.15.
28. Cf. Olivelle 1998:272–273 (text and translation), 567 (notes); cp. Śvetāśvatara Upaniśad (Śvet Up) 1.4 and Olivelle’s notes, pp. 615f.
29. It is perhaps unnecessary to add that locating ethnographic support for this is difficult at best. Even possible literary support is closer to shape-shifting, in which, as we have seen earlier, a deity like Indra will create a unique form for a specific purpose.
30. Cf. BS 4.4.17: jagadvyāpāravarjaṃ prakaraṇād asannihitatvāc ca |
31. Trans. Olivelle 1998:429.
32. Cf. Śrībhāṣyam, pp. 242–243.
33. yathā gṛhādivyāptiḥ, tathā muktasya svaśaktitirodhāyakamalāpāye svaśaktyā viśvavyāptiḥ āveśaḥ bhavati |
34. TĀ 3.14: bhartā san bhriyamāṇo bibharti eko devo bahudhā niviṣṭaḥ.
35. na hi tadā naisargikajñānakriyābhyāṃ tathā bhoktuṃ śakto bhavati kintu bhagavās tasminn āviśati yadā.
36. Recall our caveat on the use of the term “consciousness” stated in Chapter 1. The concept is multifaceted to the point of vagueness in contemporary usage, which in turn obscures Sanskrit words such as caitanya, citta, and bodha.
37. Cf. Vedāntasāra of Sadānanda, p. 23, no. 17. For an occurrence of āveśa in a slightly different sense, see Gauḍapāda’s Māṇḍukyakārikā 4.56: yāvad dhetuphalāveśaḥ saṃsāras tāvad āyataḥ, in which hetuphalāvesa has the sense of “involvement in causes and results”; cited in Halbfass 1991:328, 345n146.
38. Gombrich 1971:243.
39. Cf. Kapferer 1983, 1997; cf. Collins 1982 and the discussion in Chapter 1.
40. I have checked indexes, as far as they exist, for the Tripiṭaka and the Jātaka tales, the latter of which are in desperate need of retranslation.
41. Jātaka Together with Its Commentaries (1963) 3:511; see also 6:383. Cf. also Mahāummagga Jātaka: gahita-bhāvam (a state of possession) (Fausboll 1963: 6:383); also naradevo nāma yakkho gaṇhati (a yakṣa named Naradevo takes possession of me) (ibid.). The Jātakas are, of course, likely places for such occurrences, dealing as they do with life “histories,” rather than philosophical doctrine. For a few other similar references, see Woodward et al. 1956:345.
42. Cf. Schmithausen 1987: 1:236–237, 2:552–566.
43. Yat tan niveśanaṃ kṛtaṃ tad āryā duḥkhato viduḥ |
44. Le Mahâvastu (1882: 2:315): āviṣṭhaṃ gaditaṃ sa bhāṣati; note on p. 606: “pénétrant, perçant.” Jones translates: “penetrating and gushing is his speech” (1949: 1:263). Recently, DeCaroli (2004:25f., 128f.) has noted additional early Buddhist text passages on possession. In one tale “a yakkhi possesses a former monk, who was her son in a previous life, in order to get him to reenter the monastery” (p. 128). In another case, a Vinaya text explains that possession by a piśāca is sufficient reason to break the rain retreat” (ibid.).
45. See Trenckner et al. 1960–90: 2:228; cf. the causative gerund āvisāpetvā in Theragāthā-aṭṭhakathā III.181.2: taṃ taṃ janaṃ (sisaṃ) āvisāpetvā attano gatiṃ kathāpeti (made the spirits of various dead persons enter their skulls and relate their rebirths).
46. One can still refer with undiminished pleasure to Coomaraswamy’s studies from the 1920s and 1930s (1971, 1993). See also Sutherland, who believes that the terms rākṣasa, piśāca, gandharva, and yakṣa are often confounded and used interchangably (1991:49–61, for descriptions of different semidivine demons).
47. Edgerton 1953: 2:109.
48. Trans. Rothenberg 1996:147, text p. 56. Note the felicitous translation, “inspirited,” of āviṣṭaḥ. Cf. Jamison (1996:115), who speaks of “the inspiriting drink soma.”
49. Cf. Richardson (1993:50), who renders this lhabeb (lha-’bebs) (oracular possession).
50. I am grateful to John Dunne for this information.
51. For a further discussion of these terms, see Chapter 10.
52. Samuel 1993:194. Recall the earlier discussion of dpa’-bo and references to the works of Berglie and Srinivas. See also the study of Tibetan oracles by Nebesky-Wojkowitz 1956:398–454, passim. For a good ethnography, see Kakar 1982:108–113.
53. Gray 2004:3.
54. Ibid.:5.
55. Ibid.:6.
56. More or less in agreement with Stablein and Samuel, cf. Chapter 2, n. 133.
57. See Nebesky-Wojkowitz 1956:100ff., 444ff. Recently another report of possession oracles participating in political processes in India came to my attention. In February 2006, in the northern state of Himachal Pradesh, nearly two hundred devtās (the local term for men and women who experience goddess possession and serve as official oracular representatives from villages in Kullu district) convened a possession congress in which they all entered states of possession and performed a special form of divination as part of the local political process. The issue at stake was the proposed construction of a ski resort for tourists. In their advisory capacity they overwhelmingly voted it down, strictly, I am told, because of the results of their divination while experiencing possession. According to my informant, a graduate student in English literature from Panjab University in Chandigarh, but a native of that region, the ruling stands. I intend to investigate this further.
58. See the remarks in Germano and Gyatso 1998. An excerpt from their partial translation of the Nyingmapa Luminous Web of Precious Visions reads: “Upon the descent of blessings during his performance of the nonelaborate empowerment, the glorious and great Mantra Protectress [Ekajaṭi] descended into one of the yoginīs, and she began to perform. When everyone else became full of doubt, the lama said, ‘Because a ḍākinī has actually descended here [in her], get over your worries! I am a yogin who has realized the single flavor of appearances and mind, and thus no obstacles will ensue!’” (pp. 251–252).
59. On the importance of this text, much greater than Tucci’s relegation of it to the category of minor Buddhist texts (see note 61), see Sarbacker 2001:16; cf. also Williams 1989:196–197.
60. This chapter is a widely used meditation manual, recommended by the Dalai Lama; cf. Dalai Lama 2001. For the extraordinary lore that has grown up around the Bhāvanākrama (BhK), see Kapstein 2000:34, 220n71; Ruegg 1989; Tucci 1958. For an English summary of the first chapter, see Tucci 1958:155–182. On this chapter, see also Demiéville 1952. For translations of the Tibetan text of the second chapter, see Dalai Lama 2001 and Sopa et al. 1998. Regarding the third chapter, see Demiéville 1952:336–353, and for a lucid translation of it, see Olson and Ichishima 1979. An excellent study of the BhK and its sources is Gomez 1983. The soteriology expressed in this text is not limited to the BhK, a text of the Gelukpa school of Tibetan Buddhism; for another example see Buswell 1997.
61. For the text, see Tucci 1958:211. In a continuation of the same passage the BhK cites a text called the Avikalpapraveśadhāraṇī (Incantantation for Entrance into a State of Nonrepresentation).
62. For the text, see Tucci 1971:8. Recall the discussion in Chapter 1 on pudgala as “person.”
63. Bhava and bhāva have the sense of worldly experience. Thus the BhK cites the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa Sūtra: upāyena bhavagatigamanaṃ muktiḥ (Living in the world with method is liberation) (Sopa et al. 1998:25). Bhava also indicates the quality or characteristic of a dharma or property of a thing.
64. Sarnath ed., 220; all references in the following notes are to page numbers in this edition.
65. Ibid.: 204.
66. Ibid.: 212. See Sopa et al. 1998:19.
67. BhK, Sarnath ed., 214. Sopa et al. (1998) translate as follows: “When you see that your mind is tired, you should consider the benefits of meditative concentration and meditate enthusiasm” (p. 20). Also: tato viśramya punar api tathaiva sarvadharmanirābhāsaṃ samādhim avataret | (ibid.: 214) (After taking refuge, one should again enter into that samādhi which exposes all dharmas). Here the verb avataret (ava-√tṛ) replaces praviśet or even bhāvayet.
68. Sarnath ed., 214. The word pravṛttam here (translated as “embarked”) has the sense of entrance, fully entering inside a condition, equivalent to the BhK usage of praveśa (rather praviṣṭam).
69. ata eva kevalaṃ śūnyatāṃ sevamānasya mā bhūn nirvāṇapraveśa iti | Tucci 1971:28. I thank John Newman for pointing out several of these passages.
70. Note the relationship between the concepts of response and responsibility as constructed by Derrida: “the activating of responsibility (decision, act, praxis) will always take place before and beyond any theoretical or thematic determination” (1995:26). A close examination of Indian philosophy reveals the same imperative, if somewhat differently configured, strategies of subsuming ethics to totalizing (or totalitarian) agendas.
71. Lewis 2000:47.
72. YS 3.37: te samādhāv upasargā vyutthāne siddhayaḥ |
73. See Halbfass 1988: “Buddhism and other traditions which are built upon the insights and experiences of personal founders encourage their followers to aim at the same experiential goals, at re-living, re-experiencing the original insights. However, this does not imply that they ask them to re-examine or test the claims of the founders in an experimental fashion and to pursue their own consciousness research” (p. 393). Nevertheless, the history of spirituality in India reveals considerable variation and change within traditions and lineages.
74. BhK, text p. 216; Sopa et al. 1998:24. Nevertheless, there are limits. The BhK continues: “The views of those who follow the path of sanctification [tīrthakamārga, followers of brahmanical sects] are totally without wisdom, in every way, because of their contrary views about the self and so on. Thus they cannot achieve liberation.” For the text, see Sarnath ed., p. 216.
75. The Bhāgavata Purāṇa 7.5.23 prescribes a number of practices organized around the theme of cultivating devotion. Some are to be practiced alone, others in a group.
76. See Mumford 1989 on Ortner 1978: “she argues that in promoting a personal, ‘inner’ religious path, Lamaist ideology tends to isolate individual identity from the matrix of social ties, while shamanic identity remains embedded in the world of relations, even accepting spirit penetrations into the self” (p. 7). To see how this plays out in Mumford’s ethnography, see Mumford 1989:196ff.
 