+++
title = "8 Vampires, Prostitutes, and Poets"

+++
Narrativity and the Aesthetics of Possession

## Culture, Fiction, and Possession
In the present study we examine possession as a descriptor for a kind or class of mood, as a mechanism of divine creation, as a possible consequence of the consumption of soma, as a factor in disease production, as part of the job description of the gandharva and other semidivine beings, as ordnance in the arsenal of accomplished yogins, and as a mode of devotion. What sets these portrayals apart from representations of possession in texts we examine here is that they were assumed by the authors of the various genres we have examined so far (Vedas, Purāṇas, Sanskrit epics, Yoga texts, Tantras, medical literature, and so on) to abide in a kind of facticity based on the interplay of myth, historical event, discourse mode, and didactic intent. This presumption held its ground even when the possession episodes in question were knowingly and unabashedly embellished as part of a literary enterprise. To cite two examples, the hagiographical rendering of Śaṅkara’s possession was lifted almost entirely from earlier fictional tales, as was the story of the possession by darkness of King Purañjana.

What we examine here are a few explicitly fictional works that make little attempt to adorn themselves with either piety or excessive devotion to normative dharma; in other words, the fictional material presented in this chapter has not been appropriated as either fact or normative discourse by other genres. Afterward, we inquire into the aesthetics of possession, a subject that periodically occupies the remaining chapters.

Because of the energy and authority invested in its Sanskritic presentation, itself based on accumulated cultural memory (reinforced by a dynamic system of mnemonics), the assumption of possession as an existential possibility was never questioned or debated, at least outside Mahāyāna Buddhist medical treatises in which “demons” were viewed as manifestations of mental afflictions and karma, thus reducing their ontological status to that of illusion.1 In ethnographies as well as in most of the texts we have examined, the debate, where it is found, has been over authenticity: Is observed possession genuine or feigned? In the absence of data on direct visual experience of spirits, deities, or subtle bodies of yogins entering others’ bodies, the parameters of the debates have concerned the reliability and veracity of the reportage, the suitability of the overall context for possession, and the evaluation by the audience of the quality of the observed possession experience. The audience might consist of an individual or group witnessing the possession event, as attested in such diverse settings as the Upaniṣads and modern South Indian Draupadī cult ritual. In these settings, the individual becomes an alien party to his or her own possession or, more germane to the present discussion of aesthetics, a reader of or listener to a story. I maintain these categories of observer or observer/participant because they are valid within the broad panorama of Indic culture. All three of these barometers of reliability—veracity, context, and quality—are elastic and have been expanded (or contracted) through time, community or regional variation, and the innovations of retelling.

In what we have discussed thus far, little attention has been paid to the reception of possession in premodern public culture, though in our brief discussion of possession and trance channeling we can perhaps sense a suggestion of this. In any event, that changes here. What we address in this chapter is possession as it appears in works of fiction, as part of the Indian imaginaire. This is important because this genre has been instrumental in setting the ontological and soteriological tone for other literary genres. These texts measure cultural consensus in ways that philosophical, prescriptive, or scientific literature cannot. Indic fiction—which includes drama (nāṭaka), collections of didactic tales (such as the Kathāsaritsāgara [KSS], Bṛhatkathā, Pañcatantra, Hitopadeśa, Prabandhacintāmaṇi), and the variegated genres of epic poetry (kāvya) and novels (e.g., the Kādambarī and the Daśakumāracarita)—was not meant to be read literally, historically, or paradigmatically. It may also be argued that the two Sanskrit epics, the Purāṇas, and the truth-bearing tales from the Upaniṣads fall in the genre of fiction. However, for our purposes we classify them elsewhere. The “truth” in some of these genres (nāṭaka, kāvya) lies in their significance and evocation, in the quality and emotional clarity of their reception.

The motifs of Indic fiction are often drawn from the Sanskrit epics and the Purāṇas, which contain good, even riveting, stories that are strongly redolent of fiction to many modern readers,2 but were, on the whole, taken literally in ancient and classical Indian public culture. It is these works that subsequently germinated and nourished the public imagination and its concurrent social reality. These contributed to further reports of possession, of a literature that grew out of these texts, and a subsequent prescriptive literature that inevitably accompanied them. Descriptive and prescriptive texts feed off and build on each other, becoming cyclical and self-generating. Among their more playful offspring are classical epics and fiction, which include or reflect both narrative and prescriptive normativity. In this way, notice of possession in the Mahābhārata (MBh), the KSS, and other texts, some of which we discuss here, had the force of becoming, as Rosalind Morris states in her discussions of possession in Thailand, “the fictions that mediums themselves inhabit.”3

One may compare the 1971 American novel The Exorcist, by William Peter Blatty, and the 1973 film of the same name adapted from it as examples in which fictionalized possession had deep repercussions in popular culture.4 Blatty wrote a fictional and highly sensationalized account of exorcisms that occurred in Washington state and St. Louis in 1949. Some of the behavior of Blatty’s characters, such as fits of vomiting, which he created to sensationalistic effect, were then replicated (and theologically explained) in exorcisms conducted by both the Catholic Church and evangelical Protestant ministries. For many years, a popular kind of religious therapy consisted of repeated engagement in cathartic exorcisms, as the reigning priesthoods did little to discourage their flocks from believing in their diabolical possession. By venturing such a comparison, I am not arguing that first-millennium Indian poets and playwrights commodified possession in the way that one might observe in certain Christian evangelical denominations today; rather, I am arguing against the positions of Morris and Lambek that possession by alleged entities of one description or another, based at least in part on fictional accounts, are themselves entirely fictive.

Belief and the power of myth objectify and energize the objects of such belief and place them in a different relationship to the agent of the belief than is the case with the casual reader of a novel or the casual viewer of a film. The power of effective fiction or drama is its ability to gain the confidence of its audience, which is to say its affective power. The Indian discipline of aesthetic theory (alaṃkāraśāstra) is, in fact, constructed around notions of audience response; it engages literary and dramatic works in terms of their ability to cultivate in the audience specific emotions (bhāva) and moods (rasa). We discuss a specific case of this in Chapter 9: the connection between aesthetic appreciation and devotional possession. Although the textuality of the Bhāgavata Purāṇa or any one of a number of ornate poetical works aims to cultivate the mood of divine possession through the power and sweetness of its expression and imagery, texts that are more accessible (which is to say less sectarian), such as the MBh and KSS, are also designed to capture the imagination of their audiences. The composers of various renditions of the tales of King Vikrama and the vampire had no intention of evangelizing an audience about the facticity of the events of Vikrama’s kingship or the ontological reality of the vampire, yet they must have been aware of both their contributions to the imaginaire, bringing this aspect of Sanskrit fiction to specialized and often vernacular audiences, and the limits of their project, didactic entertainment without an undercurrent of soteriological preaching. Nevertheless, such didacticism was not without its religious background. It is in the concomitance of fiction and the religious imagination, reflected in the literary descriptions of religious and social culture, that we can ascribe a kind of substantiality to possession and to spirits, at least within the topos of Marriott’s notion of substance codes. The question to be considered here is not whether these substantialities possess mass, form, and intent of their own. Rather, the preeminent issue is of representation: How has the cycle of genre, belief, and experience functioned to further constitute possession in South Asia? The following discussions are intended to enable us to cautiously approach an answer to this question.

## Possession in Sanskrit Fiction
Possession, especially of the dead, was a particularly lively motif in Sanskrit and other Indic fiction. This was discussed at length by Maurice Bloomfield, who noted in 1917 that possessing another’s body “is an art destined to make a brilliant career in fiction.”5 Bloomfield, however, examined possession solely as a literary curiosity, not as a cultural phenomenon. In his study, Bloomfield summarized tales from the MBh, the KSS, including its lengthy cycle called Vetālapañcaviṃśati or the twenty-five tales of King Vikrama and a certain testy vampire (vetāla), and a few Jain texts, including the Pārśvanātha Caritra and Merutuṇga’s Prabandhacintāmaṇi (Wishing Stone of Narratives). His texts adopt familiar themes: a person or semidivine being like a yakṣa enters the body of another for the sake of personal gain, to protect the possessed individual, to learn a secret art, or to revive a deceased loved one. Some of these themes have already been observed in the MBh. The process of taking possession resembles that described in the Yogasūtras (YS) and its allied literature: forced, and usually stealthy, entry. The term attested most frequently is parakāyapraveśa, synonymous with the YS’s para śarīrāveśaḥ, terms consistent with our general observation that externally induced possession is recorded by forms of the verb pra√viś (the YS use of āveśaḥ demonstrates that this is not always the case). Unlike what we find in the hagiographies and yoga texts, rarely in fiction is spiritual or religious benefit suggested as a motive for possession except as it might coincide with personal gain. Instead, what is most prominent are tales in which animals are possessed either out of necessity, as when King Vikrama is exiled into the body of an elephant after his own body has been taken over by a brahman, or to gain access to secrets, as when various individuals enter the bodies of parrots, with their innate ability to mimic human speech.

Perhaps the most paradigmatic example of this is the recurrent tale of King Vikramāditya and a series of possessions, which both reprises and shadows many other possession accounts we have already explored, including the tale of Vipula Bhārgava and Ruci in the MBh and Śaṅkara’s possession of the dead king Amaruka. Bloomfield devotes most of his study to investigating the textuality of the Vikramāditya tale, providing a delightful translation of its rendition in the Pārsvanātha Caritra. It must suffice here to note three principal emphases of the story: the manner in which the king learns the secret art of possession (parapurapraveśavidyā), the teachings of dharma that emerge from the mouth of the possessed, and the depiction of possession sequentially so that no other body remains without a jīva or independent conscious being. A further example of the latter, a common theme in tales of possession, occurs in the Prabandhacintāmaṇi. Bloomfield cites Tawney’s translation of this text, in which the yogin Bhairavānanda relates to King Vikrama an account of the transposition of jīvas:



The king, while the Brahman kept guard, entered by his science the body of his elephant;  
The Brahman entered the body of the king; then the king became a pet parrot;  
The king transferred himself into the body of a lizard; then considering that the queen was likely to die,  
The Brahman restored to life the parrot, and great king Vikrama recovered his own body.6

The value of these stories as pure entertainment should not be underestimated. The themes involved, including possession, surely affected the audience differently than did similar stories found in the MBh or various Purāṇas, where the entertainment was both colored and deepened by its link with the archetypes that the listeners’ lives were in many ways modeled after. Hence, the “truth” of the series of possessions related to King Vikrama by Bhairavānanda was of a different order from that of Ruci by Vipula Bhārgava, of the dead king Amaruka by Śaṇkarācārya, or of the wife and daughter of Patañcala Kāpya by a gandharva. In the latter examples, the flow was understood to be from life experience to story rather than the other way around. But the direction of flow perhaps does not much matter in its effect on an audience, as evidence from literature and film, for example, The Exorcist or the recent Hindi film Bhoot (2003), testifies.

To employ another example, let us momentarily consider Henry James’s dark 1898 novella, The Turn of the Screw, a spooky tale in which children become possessed, arguably the most influential work of its kind in Western literature. Edward Parkinson, in his dissertation on the subject, details its thematic ancestry in nineteenth-century spiritualism and its influence beyond Anglophone literary culture. Like The Exorcist, The Turn of the Screw was not written in a vacuum, as a literary work unconnected with contemporary cultural phenomena. In both these cases, as in Indian history, vectors of literary ancestry and influence are difficult to determine, as personal experience, paradigm, and fiction flow into and out of one another with stunning ease.7 One can argue that the construction of an image and its subsequent interpretation or conversely an experience based on a previously inscribed image and its subsequent refashioning as a further incarnation of that image, ad infinitum, is mere representation. The argument runs that any such sequence, incontestably normal in the world, renders any experience, even (or particularly) one deeply felt and articulately expressed, as a representation, a decaying or vanishing, that advances through an unsuccessfully wrought urge to maintain or precisely replicate itself. In this way, all experiences may be said to be mutating shadows of previous forms; they are, in other words, unstable images or representations.8 This is not thoroughly life-denying; indeed, they can still retain integrity, spontaneity and authenticity. As with a living being, its growth, thought patterns, and power mutate from infancy to adulthood to death, yet are fully formed at every moment. The fact of its mutability, however, renders its fullness unstable, an ever-vanishing incarnation of prior moments, prior images. It is, thus, a mere representation of asymptotic or ever-converging phenomena that never quite meet, its quality as representation defined by the character of its disappearance, by its solitary and uniquely defined presence in and as memory.9 Nevertheless, reducing any experience, including its authenticity, to ephemeral representation in this way also nullifies its virtue, which in the case of possession or any other intimate practice abjures the personal and altruistic value that lies at the center of the experience as practice (or, in the case of possession, even as disease). Let us see now how these themes play out in a few Indian fictional texts.

## The Vetālapañcaviṃśati
The obvious place to begin is the Vetālapañcaviṃśati, probably the best-known example of possession in Hindu fiction (I exclude the MBh from this category). I can hardly do better than to quote Asko Parpola’s lengthy summary of the frame story of this cycle:

The hero is a brave king called Vikramāditya, the “sun of valour,” or (in Somadeva’s version) Trivikramasena. A mendicant (bhikṣu, śramaṇa) called Kṣāntiśīla donates a fruit every day to the king, who without further ado gives them to his treasurer. Ten years pass until accidentally it is found out that each fruit contains a precious jewel. The king asks the mendicant why he is giving these presents, and the mendicant replies that he needs the help of a hero in a magic ritual. The king immediately promises his help, and the mendicant asks him to come to a big cemetery (smasāna) on the fourteenth night of the dark half of the month. The mendicant would be waiting there beneath a banyan tree (vaṭa).

The king does so, wraps himself in a dark blue cloak, takes his sword, and comes to the terrible cemetery full of human skeletons and skulls and teeming with ghosts, dimly lit by funeral pyres, and finds the mendicant drawing a magic circle (maṇḍala) beneath the banyan tree. He asks the king to fetch the dead body of a man that is hanging from a sissoo [śiṃśapa] tree at some distance to the south. The king agrees, and finds the corpse hanging from a tree, smelling of raw flesh and burnt by the flames of funeral pyres. The king climbs the tree and lets the dead body fall down with the rope (by which it was hung) cut. Falling on the ground, the corpse makes a cry. Suspecting the body to be still alive, the king out of pity starts to stroke it, but then the body bursts into a loud laughter, from which the king understands it to be a vampire. When he says, “Why do you laugh? Let’s go!” the corpse flies back to the tree. With much trouble the king again climbs the tree and fetches the body, puts it on his shoulder and keeping silent, starts taking it to the banyan tree.

Now the vampire tells a story to entertain the king on the road. The story ends in a riddling question, and the vampire threatens the king that if he knows the answer and does not say it, then his head will burst asunder into a hundred pieces. The king replies to the query, but when he breaks the silence, the body flies back to the tree again. The same thing happens over and over again, until the vampire asks such a question that the king cannot answer and therefore goes on in silence. Now the vampire declares to the king that he is satisfied with his courage, determination and smart replies, reveals the real intention of the mendicant, and advises the king how to deal with him.

The king arrives at the banyan tree and sees that the mendicant has smeared the ground with blood and drawn a magic circle on it with white powder made of ground human bone, placed a pot filled with blood at each of the cardinal directions around it, and nearby a sacrificial fire flames high from rich libations of the “great oil” (made of the fat of human victims), while all the sacrificial implements are collected in readiness for worshipping the mendicant’s chosen divinity. The mendicant is overjoyed at the king’s arrival and takes the dead body down from his shoulder, bathes it, binds a garland (around its neck), places the corpse inside the circle, applies sacred ashes on his own limbs, puts on a sacrificial thread made of human hair, puts on the funeral clothes of a dead person, meditates a moment, and with the power of mantras makes the vampire enter into the corpse. Then he worships the vampire by offering it guest water from a human skull with carefully cleaned human teeth (as his offering ladles), then gives flowers, incense and ointment, fumigates with human eyes, and makes a bali offering with pieces of (human) flesh. Then he asks the king to prostrate himself on the ground so that eight parts of his body will touch the earth, in adoration of the overlord of spells who is present, so that the deity will be pleased to give as a boon the success that the mendicant has been praying for the king.

The king, following the advice given by the vampire, replies that he does not know how the prostration is to be done, and asks the mendicant to show him first. When the mendicant prostrates himself, the king chops his head off with a strike of his sword. He also pulls out the heart-lotus (hṛt-padma) that he has torn from the mendicant’s stomach, and gives the head and the heart lotus to the vampire. While pleased hosts of ghosts applaud, the satisfied vampire says to the king from the corpse: “the overlordship of the (deities called) ‘wisdom carriers’ (vidyādhara) coveted by this mendicant will be yours at the end of your enjoyment of your imperial rule on the earth. As you have been troubled by me, please choose as a boon whatever you wish.” The king asks for the stories told by the vampire to be told and held in honour on the earth. The vampire grants the wish, saying that whoever tells or hears even one verse of these stories with respect, will be released from sin and obtain immunity from all sorts of demons and ghosts, including Yakṣas, Vetālas, Kūṣmāṇḍas, Ḍākinīs, and Rākṣasas.10

The mendicant’s name, Kṣāntiśīla, and the reference to him as a śramaṇa indicate that he is a Buddhist. This ascription of unusual or magical powers to Buddhist mendicants is consistent with what appears in the earlier Bhagavadajjuka, discussed below. Thus, the attribution of skill in performing esoteric ritual to Buddhist mendicants must have been fairly common in the first millennium C.E. Although this depiction may have elements of the pot calling the kettle black, of brahmans hurling accusations of decadence or debauchery at Buddhists, this depiction appears in popular literature not only in South Asia but in Tibet and China as well. This fragment of classical ethnography supports the assertions of Ronald Davidson that popular, even tribal, practices were incorporated into Mahāyāna Buddhism in the mid- to late first millennium (see Chapter 11) and that they were easily thematized in popular fiction.

The transformation of the inside of a fruit into a precious gem after ten years suggests knowledge of alchemical processes. That the mendicant was drawing a maṇḍala with blood and ground human bone beneath a tree, and probably arranged to have the unidentified corpse hung from a tree some distance to the south (the realm of Yama), also indicate that the mendicant was learned in dark, probably tantric, ritual.11

The ritual self-identification with the dead—the sacred thread of human hair that was probably that of the victim, the donning of the clothes of the deceased, the offering of guest water (arghya) from a carefully cleansed human skull, and so on—conspired to create a general atmosphere of possession and enlivenment of the corpse; and as if on cue it obliged. This, we must remember, is fiction, so we must expect such excesses; these and other symmetries and synchronicities are the stuff of fiction. The main object of the ritual, to please a deity to the point that it granted a boon, was also consistent with most tantric possession. In the end the king emerges victorious over the mendicant, which indicates another stroke (indeed, a beheading) in the eternal battle between political and religious power. The head, the locus of narration, and the heart lotus, the seat of consciousness, satisfy the vetāla, who guarantees that with the assistance of a vidyādhara, a “wisdom-bearer” captured as part of the boon, the narration will continue for the benefit, even the enlightenment, of all beings who hear it. This is a standard Indian coda, tantric and non-tantric; that it should be repeated in the context of a narrative of possession and horror probably served to validate these practices in the mind of the listener. It is this validation or legitimation within the public imagination that was instrumental in the continuity of these tales in innumerable variations over countless centuries and generations.

Let us examine one story from a variation on this collection, this time from Jambhaladatta’s later version of the Vetālapañcaviṃśati.

Then as the goblin [vetāla] was being carried along again, he told another story:

Your majesty, in the land of Kaliṇga there was a city named Yajñasthala. There dwelt a brahman called Yajñasoma. His wife was Somadattā. She bore to him a son named Brahmasvāmin. Though he understood the truth of all sciences [sarvaśāstratattvajñaḥ], through the power of fate [daivavaśāt] he died. His parents, lamenting much, with their kinsfolk took him and went to the charnel grounds [smasāna] to perform the last rites. At that time an ascetic dwelling there saw that the body was that of a brahman’s son skilled in all the sciences and handsome, who had met an unseasonable death [ayuktakālemaraṇam]. He lamented aloud in a mournful voice and then danced with the greatest gaiety. Immediately he arose and through the power of yoga abandoned his old body and entered [praviveśa] the body of the dead brahman youth. The boy was as if he had arisen from sleep. His parents felt great joy. The whole party of kinsfolk rejoiced. Brahmasvāmin, when he had regained life, abandoned all pleasures and continually practiced meditation [yogaṃ dhyāyas tasthau].

“Why did the ascetic dwelling in the cemetery lament and why did he dance? Let your majesty tell me the cause of those actions.” The king said: “Listen, goblin.” He lamented, thinking: “Abandoning my old body I shall acquire a brahman’s body, which is a vessel of all good qualities [sarvaguṇādhāram].” As the king was saying this, the goblin hung again on the śiṃśapā tree.12

This story, like many others, and like much of what we have seen of possession in general, ends up reinforcing the social order.13 The king aspires to become a brahman as personal identities are effaced and replaced. This demonstration of the uncertainty of personal identity inspired the king to yearn for a higher position on the dharmic pecking order. Although it may be that this muffled ending reflects a sanitized, brahmanized reinscription, it also demonstrates the acceptance of the fragility of identity. In his battle to both retain and relocate his identity, the courageous king gains the upper hand over the vetāla. In this sense, the tantric ritual is delegitimized and the narrative becomes one of rationalization, as if the king were saying, “Look, we don’t have to be afraid of the powers of those old tantriks if we just use our heads and refuse to be afraid of ghosts.”

We can interpret this as an Indian iteration of Freud’s notion of the uncanny (Unheimlich), discussed above. The point in this discourse is that notions of the uncanny in fiction go hand in hand with a drive to rationalize. In this dialectic, the uncanny becomes separated as a genre or motif because of social and cultural pressure to distinguish the realms of rational and irrational.14 Such pressure is often extreme in Sanskritic culture, in which the formalities of rationalization and demystification, legacies of Mīmāṃsā and Vedānta orthodoxies, supersede magic, horror, and other things uncanny. This is evidenced not only here but even more so in the hagiographies of Śaṅkara, whose yogic exploits extend to the heart of the uncanny. These stand manifestly apart from the hyperrationalization of Śaṅkara’s advaitic discourse, in which he virtually never discusses his personal experience, the result of his unyielding priority of proof (pramāṇa) based on vedic precedence (sruti) over that of personal experience and, in particular, memory.

All these stories reiterate to a certain extent one of the themes of Śaṅkara’s possession of the dead king Amaruka: possible immunity from the effects of one’s actions or position in life by possessing another body. This is reinforced in the story of Indradatta from the beginning of KSS. Here, Indradatta, the brahman disciple of the grammarian Vyāḍi, enters the corpse of the recently deceased sūdra king Nanda in order to procure a million pieces of gold, which he intended to use to pay tuition for a very costly course in Sanskrit grammar. Unfortunately for Indradatta (and doubtless for Varṣa, the grammarian who stood to gain from the transaction), the king’s minister, believing Indradatta dead, decides to have his corpse burned.15 In all these cases, the body of the possessed and the possessor have been marked—with sacred threads, blue cloaks, sectarian marks, and so on, some mentioned, others assumed—and thus possess degrees of purity or impurity that distinguish them from other bodies. The body in possession is a topic that deserves further discussion, but we must postpone this until the final chapter, when we can address the topic more definitively.16

## The Bhagavadajjukāprahasanam
The most extended example of possession as a motif in Sanskrit fiction occurs in the early seventh-century drama Bhagavadajjukāprahasanam (The Farce of the Saint-Courtesan), by the Pallava king Mahendravarman (though it was more likely written by a paṇḍita in his court). One of the peculiarities of Sanskrit drama is that it is composed not just in Sanskrit but in one or more Middle Indic (Prakrit) dialects as well, based on the social ranking of the characters. Because several words in the Prakrit parts of the dialogue do not find Sanskrit phonological counterparts (e.g., āhiṇḍitum [to beg]), it is possible that this drama was originally written in Prakrit, after which a full Sanskrit rendering (chaya) was produced, rather than originally entirely in Sanskrit, after which the appropriate lines of the dialogue were translated into Prakrit. This is important because it may indicate that the flow of influence of the popularly conceived possession was from Prakrit, which is to say the public domain, into Sanskrit. However, this is by no means a final proof; it may simply be that the author worked in this fashion.

One striking aspect of the drama is the ease with which possession becomes its pivot. This suggests that by the middle of the first millennium C.E. it had become a familiar cultural event. Thus, without any introduction to its subtleties the author felt comfortable introducing it as the subject of a comedy (prahasana), which must have offered considerable enjoyment to its audience.17 In short, an unnamed mendicant (parivrajaka), a reprobate and convert to Buddhism, decides that he needs to prove his yogic skill to a particularly insolent disciple, Śāṇḍilya by name. He thus enters the body of a harlot (ajjukā, gaṇikā, vrṣalī) who had just died of poisoning from a snakebite, saying, “I will insert [niyojayāmi] my self [ātman] into the body of this courtesan.” After the mendicant has possessed her through his yogic skills (yogenāviṣṭāḥ), the harlot’s lover approaches her. To his astonishment, she replies in chaste Sanskrit, “Don’t touch me with unwashed hands!” (aprakṣālitapāṇibhyāṃ mā sprākṣīḥ). This contains a clear suggestion of sexuality as a result of unregulated possession, and the disciple does not hesitate to remind his guru of it.

The understanding of the relationship between sexuality and possession is also implicit in the earlier tale of Vipula Bhārgava and Ruci, in which the sexuality is blunted by Vipula’s control and his guru’s admonitions. The connection becomes more explicit in the hagiographies of Śaṅkara, who lived about a century after the composition of the Bhagavadajjukā. The theme in these hagiographies is assumed by the Śaṅkara traditions to be unique, but we can see a long history behind it. We can well imagine that in the public mind possession must have been regarded as an entrée into surreptitious and illicit pleasure. The woman’s penetrability, on many levels, was apparently taken for granted by this time. As the play progresses, the agent of Yama (yamapuruṣaḥ), who is holding the soul (ātman) of the harlot, realizes upon receiving a message from Yama that her death had been a mistake. It was not, in fact, the appointed time for her to die. However, in seeing that the effect of the snakebite had been reversed, effectively reviving her, he decides to have a little fun and deposits her life-breaths (strīprāṇāḥ) in the temporarily vacated body of the mendicant.18 When, unaware that she is inhabiting the body of this buffoon of a mendicant, the harlot sees her lover, she asks him, in Prakrit, for a tight embrace and some liquor (rāmaḷia āliṃgehi maṃ … suraṃ pibāmi). This is doubtless a hilarious scene. A doctor is called in to provide a remedy for the snake’s poison, but announces that she has not in fact been bitten. Unknown to him, the agent of Yama has already removed any trace of the snakebite. Rather, the doctor declares, “she must be possessed” (āviṭṭhā khu bhave [Skt. āviṣṭā khalu bhavet]). Eventually, at the behest of Yama, his loyal if easily diverted servant turns to the mendicant, in the body of the harlot, and asks him to release her body (bhagavan mucyatāṃ vrṣalyāś śarīram). The yamapuruṣa then returns the jīvas to their proper places, normalcy is restored, and the drama comes to a rousing end.19

Read by itself, and through the screen of its deliberate humor, the Bhagavadajjukā suggests that women, especially those of low caste or disreputable professions, are highly susceptible to possession. They are regarded as penetrable, both sexually and by spirits, and susceptible to abandoned selfhood.20 Conversely, men, even buffoons like the mendicant, are depicted as ritual masters in control, at least in control of women. That women are depicted as highly susceptible to possession is largely consistent with the ethnographic record. Another Sanskrit work of fiction almost exactly contemporaneous with the Bhagavadajjukā that reaffirms these observations is the mid-seventh-century Daśakumāracarita of Daṇḍin. In this work, the vocabulary for possession is quite varied: In one story a maiden called Bālacandrikā is possessed (adhiṣṭhāya, adhiṣṭhitam) by a yakṣa.21 Later, in an interesting tale of amorousness tinged explicitly with sexual possession, a prince declares to an enemy king whose semidivine daughter he loves, “I am your son-in-law, the one who possessed [abhimarṣī] your daughter without your permission.”22 In spite of these passages, and the data from the Bhagavadajjukā, it is important here to recognize that women’s possession can be read as ritual mastery and men’s as abandoned selfhood, the opposite of what we see here. There are no hard and fast gender markers. The portrait in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad of the wife and daughter of Patañcala Kāpya, possessed by gandharvas, bears this out. It appears that they were in control of their possessing gandharvas and not under the control of Patañcala Kapya or any other man. Similarly, the accounts of Nala’s possession by Kali and Śaṅkara’s possession of the dead king Amaruka depict Nala and Śaṅkara as ritual masters who lost control of their powers—they fell prey to the uncanny—while Damayantī and Ubhayabhāratī countered this with their predilection for rational action.

## Can There Be an Aesthetic of Possession?
Any discussion of a possible formal aesthetic of possession based on classical theories of Indian poetics (alaṃkāraśāstra), the central element of which is cognate, in spirit at least, with what is known in Western scholarly discourse as audience response theory, must be addressed more fully after an evaluation of possession in devotional religious practice and an appraisal of Indian demonologies (bhūtavidyā). These are discussed in Chapters 9 and 12. However, it is important to begin this discussion here, because more than anywhere else, except perhaps in the more technical and inaccessible literature of Āyurveda and Tantra, possession is revealed in fiction and drama to be a conspicuous feature of popular culture, if not always well regarded among the literati. Explicitly fictional material, which we might define in the Indian context as narrative works with no pretense to direct representation of religious or cultural history,23 should, then, be more proximate to the realm of aesthetic theory than most other genres of Sanskrit literature. So, let us conclude this chapter by referring to some of the categories of mood and emotional construction, as well as audience response, in works of classical poetics, principally the Nāṭyaśāstra of Bharata, noting possible resonances of these in possession performance as reckoned in both classical literature and modern ethnographies. I should emphasize that this is highly speculative, because possession, as mentioned at the outset of this study, finds almost no place in any formal sastra or epistemologically circumscribed field of knowledge.

Does possession as revealed in these variegated sources betray a distinct or coherent aesthetic definition? If this is the case, then we should ask further whether this definition is consistent with formal aesthetic theory, beginning with its experiential categories, as articulated in the alaṃkāraśāstra. If we conclude that this is so, then we must examine how classical theory trickled down into, and perhaps defined, the structure and discourse of possession as reported in both literate and nonliterate Indian cultures. If we decide that no such classical theory or influence can be detected, then we might ask whether any other consistent aesthetic that lies outside the domain of sastraic discourse can be located, or, if there is no consistent aesthetic at all, then perhaps we can justly conclude that this is not a proper question to ask of our material.

If a formal aesthetic of possession can be derived, we must consider once again the notion of a clear and unbreachable distinction between high and low culture in India, one that demarcates the aesthetics of the upper classes and literati from that of the subaltern. We commenced this discussion by distinguishing the views of Kosambi from those of Lariviere on what we can learn of the subaltern from Sanskrit literature, the subaltern being preponderantly represented in ethnographies. As a result of recent work on the origins of tantric Buddhism by Davidson and others, discussed below (Chapter 11), the scales appear to be tipping in Lariviere’s favor. This tipping of the scales, however, may not be for the reason that Lariviere supposed, namely, renewed examination of Sanskrit manuscripts used in the construction of critical editions of often well-known texts. Rather, new strategies of deploying historical and inscriptional evidence that background these and other little-known texts has forced us to read them in new ways.24

It is impossible and inadvisable here to enter into a full discussion of categories for mood and emotion in alaṃkāraśāstra, but it will nevertheless assist us if we briefly review the most relevant aspects of “canonical” SanSkritic rasa or mood, bearing in mind Catherine Lutz’s admonition against naturalizing emotion, instead recognizing it “as a master cultural category”25 (at least in Western discourse) and treating it “as an ideological practice.”26 The classical texts, beginning with Bharata’s Nāṭyaśāstra in the second century C.E., agree on the possibility of eight principal rasas, often adding a ninth. These are not just moods presented as ontological categories, but soteriological states as well. It is important to note that these rasas are constructed from thirty-three stable and transitory emotions (sthāyi- and vyabhicāri-bhāvas) and are therefore categories superseding these emotions. The eight rasas upon which all the texts agree are erotic love (sṛṅgāra), comic laughter (hāsya), compassion arising from grief (karuṇa), ferocity (raudra), heroism (vira), fear or terror (bhayānaka), disgust (bibhatsa), and wonder (adbhūta).27 The ninth rasa, which many texts include, is tranquility (śānta).28 These rasas look very much like emotions in Western discourse; but in India they are carefully distinguished from them. Unlike in the West, however, in South Asian sāstraic thinking neither moods nor emotions bear the weight of irrationality, nor do they operate in opposition to religious truth or discourse. The classical texts almost universally declare that a properly staged and acted dramatic performance or a beautiful poem can evoke in the observer a pure experience of rasa, thus framing a salvific experience of enlightenment. The observer, however, must be a cultured appreciator, an aficionado (rasika), “one with a sympathetic heart” (sahṛdaya).29 The devaluation of emotion in Western religious discourse is not generally shared in India, at least not in classical India.30 Lutz writes that “emotions, in contrast to thoughts, predominantly happen to the person and are, therefore, not fully intentional.”31 This is decidedly not the case in India. In possession states, noted for their emotional intensity, the most prevalent of these rasas—and here we must remember that it is the possessed as well as the observer whose cognitive grasp of this is essential—are raudra and śānta, which happen to a person because they are intentional; they are, indeed, cultivated.

There is considerable evidence that possession is an intensely emotive state of awareness, a state that serves as a bridge from local culture to structures of authority and rationality. Although these structures are brahmanical in origin, by the eighth century they had leaked into Vajrayāna Buddhism. They include brahmanical ritual, legal, and social power and discourse markers and are in evidence throughout the sāstraic enterprise of category formation. In these various discourses, the classification of sentiments and moods (notably devoid of stratification until, arguably, the introduction of śānta, and later bhakti, as rasas) becomes a rhetorical strategy that transforms these sentiments and moods into recognizable (and cognizable) vehicles for mokṣa. Thus, the rhetorical bridge becomes an epistemological bridge, and from there it becomes an ontological force. The distance, then, between mood or sentiment and reason narrows, eventually influencing the dominant Indian scientific paradigm, which admits mood—or, as Freud would see it, the uncanny—as a legitimate option, if not a formal category. Paraphrasing Lutz, emotion (or mood) is not “linked to weakness” as an outcome of an ideological “split between emotion and thought.”32 Displays of pure or cultured emotion need not, then, represent unsocialized behavior, but become behavior that embodies high levels of cultural sophistication.33

Before moving to material that is more central to our study, let us look briefly at the coincidence of possession with classically described emotions in Varjayāna Buddhism. Indeed, the closest any formal epistemology comes to considering possession as a variable is found in a Vajrayāna text, the Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālasaṃvara, a yoginī Tantra that was discussed earlier. This text, originally in Sanskrit, but now extant only in Tibetan,34 explains that, by experiencing emotions (rasas) as manifestations of deities, various states of āveśa can be realized. The translation is as follows.

With song, cymbals, and dance, with gestures and with the sentiments—namely eroticism, heroism, compassion, humor, ferocity, terror, disgust, wonder, and tranquility—one’s aim will be achieved. By being endowed with the sentiments of eroticism, etc., dancing with the various gestures, and by uniting oneself with all, one will achieve all āveśa states. Eroticism [śṛṅgāra] corresponds to Vajrasattva, heroism [vīra] to the Hero Tathāgata, compassion [karuṇa] to Vajradhāra, humor [hāsya] to the supreme Lokesvara, ferocity [raudra] to Vajrasūrya, terror [bhayānaka] to Vajrarudra, disgust [bibhatsa] to Sākyamuni, wonder [adbhuta] to Arali, and tranquility [śānta] always corresponds to Buddha, since it pacifies all suffering.35

This is an exceptional passage, and may very well be isolated, though considerable swaths of early Hindu and Buddhist Tantra are lost or remain unstudied. However, nowhere else that I am aware of does a sastra or text of ritual or meditative practice (they appear to be combined here, dressed up with the accoutrements of Sanskritic formalism) link emotions with meditation on specific deities.

Now, to move into material in which the links between ethnography and text are more evident, in a recent article David Knipe has identified raudra and śānta as integral parts of the discourse of possession among both brahmans and non-brahmans in coastal Andhra Pradesh.36 The possession may be of any one of a number of goddesses (local tradition enumerates 101) or of deceased children who become established as household deities through possession. Significantly, deceased children are known locally as vīrabhadra, while the subsequently deified girls are known as vīrakanyaka and the boys as vīranna or vīruḍu.37 These designations carry an apparent conflation of vira and raudra, two canonical rasas, a fact reiterated frequently in the MBh, a text of preeminent importance in public religion in Andhra Pradesh and elsewhere in South India, where heroism was often expressed through ferocity, especially in local performance.38 In the discourse of performance, then, vira contains within it a semantic assumption of raudra. Further, the goddess, through her deeds of slaughtering demons, takes on the quality of a hero. This is true not just in popular texts such as the Durgasaptasati,39 but in possession ritual as well. Such possession of the goddesses is inevitably oracular, “for divination, propitiation, celebration or other purposes” and is “celebrated by ritualists for their ferocity and blazing anger.”40 Similarly, though the vīrakanyakas and vīrannas are deified, they nevertheless exhibit “the transparent rage of the deceased child deprived of a normal life-span and a timely death; the rage of the bereaved family, and the parents in particular; even the rage of the majority non-Brahman communities deprived of Brahmanic funerary symbols.”41 Knipe describes the raudra in these possessions as exhibitions of “opposition to established authorities,” “fierce possessiveness,” and other characteristics that embody the possessed with an “awesome and dangerous power.” Finally, from the heat (literally) of the possession, authenticated by fire walking, holding lit camphor and burning charcoal embers in their mouths, and so on, “they are brought down to a state of śānti … through eating fresh limes and being deluged with tubs of cold water,” often saturated with turmeric.42

The questions most apposite are whether the appearances of the words raudra and śānta to describe deity and spirit possession in the culture of coastal Andhra Pradesh are in fact drawn from classical Indian poetic theory and whether their provenance is more than a local and recent phenomenon in possession discourse. This is to ask, first, whether these usages have a retrievable history and, second, whether the adoption of these discursive categories also means the adoption of an entire aesthetics. First, let us recall our earlier discussion on the relationship between folk and classical in India (Chapter 4) and consider Ramanujan’s assertion of the difference between classical and folk aesthetics in India.43 Classical poetics, he says, is founded on a series of opposites (poet and audience, poet and character, character and actor), while in folk theater, “notions of possession are never far from the audience’s mind … bard and character, bard and audience, bard and actor, actor and character are merged at crucial moments and separated at ordinary times. One goes to the theater/ritual to experience such mergers in different degrees.”44

Regardless of these differences, I believe that it is fair, given the vagaries of cultural processes, especially in India, where oral tradition is often equal in authority to written text (even among elites), to suspend some of the basic requirements of classical poetics. A prime candidate for suspension is the requirement that it be the responsibility of the audience rather than the actor to apprehend rasa in its purity, as already asserted above. In the case of such ritual the actor is possessed, or at least is believed to be possessed, and is thus invested with greater authenticity than that of an ordinary actor in a staged and fully scripted drama. Multiple ethnographies reveal that, like the actor schooled in stagecraft, the possessed is aware of the demands and consequences of performing for the benefit of an audience or even an individual client. Nevertheless, the possessed exploits this valorized authenticity to enhance his or her authority, thus portraying and presumably experiencing the required rasa in a manner and strength that is not expected of the audience or client. The emotion and consequent rasa of the possessed is, by all accounts, sharper, more immediate, and better defined—a more complete dissociation and transformation of consciousness than what an observer can realize merely by following stage-managed cues. The disproportionate power assumed by the possessed in such a relationship is due to the client or audience’s ceding authority to the possessed. Although it is possible that possession—and the rasa that characterizes it—could be contagious, a contagion built on familiarity and practice, this is neither guaranteed nor generally expected. Thus, in ecstatic or divine possession, dialogue and authority tilt toward the possessed. The reasons for this are embedded in the very fascination of an audience with regard to a person whose possession has gained cultural and social legitimacy: a pregnant sense of revelation or manifestation, and the allure of the simultaneity of both attraction and danger. This could produce learned appreciators or sahṛdayas in the audience, even if such appreciation is not regarded as identical or tantamount to possession.

In both staged classical drama and public possession ritual, emotive reciprocation, albeit not necessarily precisely replicated (given the complexity of emotion), is essential for the success of the performance and the maintenance of the performative tradition. In both cases, it is to a great extent the actor who must manifest and sustain the prescribed emotion. Both the truth and the ambiguity of this may be illustrated, for example, in the performance of the Kṛṣṇa līlā, when the boy portraying Kṛṣṇa becomes Kṛṣṇa, becomes his “true form” (svarūp).45 This transformation is effected by the actor, whose costume, pedigree, and gestures help condition this transformation by contributing to the actor’s psychophysical attitude or bhāva, as well as by the audience, which recognizes this bhāva, resonates with it, and, from a state of meditative repose, intensifies it. There is an expectancy of the manifestation of the Lord Kṛṣṇa and of an appropriate emotion (usually śṛṇgāra or love) among the audience, an expectancy founded on a history of known, felt, and practiced emotional recognition and response. Nonliterate audiences as well as those more deeply embedded in Sanskritic culture develop emotional response similarly: through the application of specified and recognized bhāva. In Sanskritic culture, however, the construction and appearance of these states may be driven more definitively by rules that valorize and potentiate classical poetry and dramatic performance for author, actor, and audience alike. Yet the rules and models of presentation implicate the audience in a greater role in generating the mood appropriate to the composition.

The emotional empowerment of a highly literate, Sanskritically trained audience will, thus, be constructed with slightly variant cultural tools from those employed by an audience observing a Kṛṣṇa līlā or festival possession in South India. This is the case even if the empowerment and intensity of both of the latter tend to balance out.46 In fact, as ethnographies show, both Kṛṣṇa līlās and “folk” possession rituals draw elites as well as “folk” in large numbers, though the former participates in Sanskritic culture through extensive transformations into regional cultures, while the latter remains more distanced from any major Sanskritic source (e.g., the Siri rituals of Tulunad and Theyyam of Kerala). Thus, it appears that emotional or, more generally, aesthetic understanding validates performer, poet, and observer equally, in spite of power discrepancies, and is linked more distinctly with broader cultural and religious concerns and attitudes than with textual delineation of emotional structure and definition. The emotionally interactive nature of both folk and classical performance appears to offer a different perspective on the oppositions that Ramanujan rightly points out. This is why it is possible for an audience of highly educated brahmans and little-educated subalterns to identify and generate raudra and śānta in the same possession ritual. It is also the reason that a broad heritage of stories based on the Sanskrit vampire tales can create among audiences throughout India emotional responses that tally with the Sanskritic categories (even if not explicitly named), regardless of education, class, caste, or region of the audience. This, then, brings us back to our original question: Did the Sanskrit categories influence the understanding of emotional states in non-Sanskritic performance and discourse?

First, there is little evidence in Sanskrit literature of a direct association between possession and ferocity, āveśa and raudra. An example of this absence is in the tale of Nala, in which the word raudra does not appear in spite of a string of situations that could easily be described as “ferocious” or “wild.” The word raudra appears seven times in the Sauptikaparvan, in which Asvatthaman’s behavior is notably wild and ferocious. However, it does not appear there in semantic association with āveśa or its variant forms. Never in this narrative is āveśa delineated as raudra. The Indian imaginaire as a whole derives significantly from the MBh, while the popular imagination of fabulous possessing beings derives not just from the great epic but from the demonologies found in numerous āyurvedic and tantric texts. Yet raudra appears only once in the āyurvedic descriptions of grahas or “graspers,” beings, usually demonic, that possess people.47 The absence of an explicit semantic connection between āveśa and raudra in Sanskrit literature contrasts with its notable presence in South Indian ritual possession. This suggests that the association is a fortuitous relic of locally situated Sanskritic culture, rather than a manipulation by local scholars who understood Sanskritic aesthetic theory and then intentionally imposed it on local performance. The evident absence of wholesale imposition of Sanskritic aesthetic practice onto the body of these rituals supports this.

Raudra is derived from the word “Rudra,” the name of the angry and ferocious vedic and Purāṇic deity with populist roots,48 who forced his way into the sacrifice after being deprived of an equal share in the offerings. He ends up receiving his share, but outside the center of the sacrifice.49 The wildness and ferocity clearly evident in great swaths of possession events bears out the preponderance of what is classically described as raudra. This may be seen in classical tantric initiation, which employs descriptive terminology (e.g., ghūrṇi [whirling]), rather than terms for emotions, as well as in modern non-Sanskritic possession from Nepal to Kerala. For example, in the Draupadī cult, the possessed Kauravas resemble “madmen” (Ta. piccarkaḷ), and in a state of possession are overcome with anger (Ta. kōpam).50

The same can be said of śānta. Sanskrit literature reveals no direct semantic link between āveśa and śānta. As with raudra, many people in possession states appear to achieve a state of quiescence, often following an episode of raudra, anxiety, wrath, or trauma. If there is an approximation of this state in Sanskrit literature, it is likely to be found in the MBh or certain Tantras. But there is no such approximation in the former, and in the tantric texts we examine in Chapter 10 the nearest equivalent to quiescence in possession would be “sleep” (nidrā), as initiates are said to swoon, faint, or collapse. These texts also distinguish sharp moods such as raudra from ānanda (bliss), which is more often characterized as quiescent.51 Indeed, the emotional opposites, raudra and śānta, frequently alternate during states of possession.

As frequently, or even conventionally, as raudra or śānta might appear in possession in certain locales—which suggests that possession embodies a series of felt and situated practices among both the possessed and the audience52—still, we might ask, is this sufficient to establish an aesthetic of possession beyond the boundaries of the local tradition and its concurrent emotional semiotic? Probably not, yet it is important to recognize that, within local traditions, as much as in the diffuse Sanskritic tradition, it is in fact possible to locate distinct aesthetics. The material from Andhra Pradesh illustrates that the mingling of Sanskritic and local cultures can produce a complex semiotics of emotion. The evidence for this is extensive and can be stretched back much farther in time. The multilingual Sanskrit dramas of the first millennium illustrate that at this time aesthetic bridges were forged between classical and nonclassical sensibilities. This is borne out elsewhere in the history of Indian literature, in countless regional languages. We cannot enter into this topic here, but the discourse of possession in regional Ianguages (see Chapter 4) demonstrates deep and broad lexical and semantic continuities for terms that express the emotional content of possession.

The aesthetic range, as it appears in possession phenomena, consistently swings between control, sobriety, and propriety, on one hand, and ecstasy, anger, eroticism, and other sharp shifts in consciousness, on the other.53 Examples of the former may be drawn from the material already presented on yogic and other forms of controlled, externally induced possession, including Śaṅkara’s possession of the dead king Amaruka, possession tales from the MBh, including that of Ruci by Vipula Bhārgava, Nala by the malevolent Kali, and King Kalmāṣapāda by the rākṣasa Kiṃkara, as well as the possession of the prostitute by the blundering mendicant in the Bhagavadajjukā. These varied examples are expressed within the semantic range of pra√viś, as explained earlier. A further example of this kind might be noted here, as it is from a distinctly fictional text. This is the didactic Yaśodharacarita by the Jaina author Vāḍirāja, dated to around 1025 C.E. (though the story is surely much older), replicated in Janna’s thirteenth-century Kannada text of same name. In this graphically violent lesson on nonviolence (ahiṃsā, the primary Jain virtue), a doomed king, Yasodhara, is ordered by his mother to offer a rooster as sacrifice to the goddess. Although the rooster is made of rice flour (śālipiṣṭamaya-kukkuṭa), thereby enabling Yasodhara to escape the karmic burden of killing a living being, it is still too close to the intent of actual killing (saṇkalpahiṃsa). As fate would have it, the skillfully painted (citrasauṣṭhava) artificial rooster proves a tempting home for a wayward spirit (atimānuṣa). The spirit possesses the rooster, which subsequently comes to life, screams, and flies upward.54 The rooster is then slaughtered by the king, an act with the worst possible karmic consequences for him, including rebirth in multiple hell worlds. Examples of possession that illustrate the opposite aesthetic, ecstasy, eroticism, and so on fit in more easily within the strict definition of ā√viś. These include the possession of the early vedic ritualists by Soma, a preponderant amount of bhakti-induced possession, and that ensuing from tantric initiation, all discussed below, and most of the possession described in the ethnographies.

In sum, this chapter offers evidence for dual, if related, paradigms of emotional definition in India, one Sanskritic, the other non-Sanskritic. Although I have drawn the latter from Telugu, examples of this from most (if not all) major Indian regional languages are likely to be found. What I am positing here is an epistemology that flows from folk to classical and back again, producing new and unique Indian forms of knowing. However, these never quite abandon old ways of knowing, in part because of a generally respected conservative tug that preserves a balance between old and new in different formulations. The Indic texts and ethnographies cited here also highlight different ways of knowing, Indian and Western, in an area of discourse that deserves more nuanced treatment than it has hitherto received.

## NOTES
1. See Clifford 1984:148ff.
2. See, for example, the work of Parpola, who has often speculated on the origins of the Sanskrit epics (e.g., 2002). Parpola sees a mid-first-millennium B.C.E. migration of pale-skinned (pāṇḍu) Iranians who migrated into India, integrated with the local population, legitimated themselves by fabricating genealogies that situated them in ruling families, and finally disseminated tales of their exploits. Few Indologists will easily subscribe to this theory, but it demonstrates that consideration of the MBh as fiction remains an ongoing enterprise.
3. Morris 2000:125.
4. Cuneo 2001 discusses this phenomenon extensively. In contemporary South Asia, the Bollywood film Aks (2000) has many of the same themes. It was not a particularly good or successful film and had little impact on Indian popular culture. The film Bhoot (2003) was somewhat better but similarly left little imprint. Much better and more successful was Paheli (2005); see preface above.
5. Bloomfield 1917:7.
6. Tawney 1901:9–10. The text reads: bhūpaḥ prāharike dvije nijagajasyāṅge ’viśad vidyayā | vipro bhūpavapur viveśa nṛpatiḥ krīḍaśuko ’bhūt tataḥ | pallīgātraniveśitātmānaṃ nṛpe vyāmṛśya devyā mṛtim | vipraḥ kīram ajīvayan nijatanuṃ śrī(vi)kramo labdhavān || Sometimes talking parrots narrate lengthy tales, including those of possession. See the Sukasaptati, stories 46–47, and the translation by Haksar 2000: 150–154.
7. See Parkinson 1991, who distinguishes “apparitionist” from “non-apparitionist” interpretations of the existence of ghosts. In the former, they are viewed as veridical manifestations of paranormal reality, while in the latter they are regarded as subjective hallucinations. Parkinson maintains that James did not adopt either stance, but was neutral on the issue. Nevertheless, his work profoundly influenced later writing on ghosts, possession, and the paranormal.
8. A highly recommended example of possession in contemporary Asian fiction appears in the first volume of Osamu Tezuka’s (1928–89) six-volume phantasmagorical manga comic on the life and times of the Buddha; cf. Buddha Vol. 1: Kapilavastu (2003:311–356). This work illustrates the process of constructing a story line from elements of popular culture grafted onto historical narrative. Tezuka devotes considerable space to characters of his own invention, including Chapra, a slave boy born as a sūdra, who in his wanderings meets a pariah boy named Tatta, who has the power to possess the bodies of animals and then have them do his bidding.
9. On the topic of authenticity in Indian ritual, which is to say the argument that what is closest to an original or archetypal form is most authentic, see F. Smith 2001b. I cannot here enter more deeply into the extensive recent discourse on the power of the image and the status of representation. For this, one must study the works of Derrida, particularly his notion of différence (1976), his essay “Plato’s Pharmacy” (pharmakon) (1981), and his meditations on mourning, esp. the chapter on Louis Marin (2001:139–164). Marin argues that the virtue of the image is its reference to its own constructed, derivative nature.
10. Parpola 1998:278–280; for the text, see KSS 75.34–57, 188; 98.60–74; 99.1–30.
11. Echoes of this continue to appear in the popular tantric imagination. See, e.g., Svoboda 1986: ch. 1.
12. Translation based on Emeneau 1934:106ff. Compare this with tale 22 of Vetālapañcaviṃśati of Śivadāsa, “Of the Yogi Who Went from One Body to Another” (Śivadāsa 1995:164–167). This is roughly the same story, but here it is a brahman named Nārāyaṇa who had studied the art of entering the body of another. The discourse varies slightly, and there is no mention of a dead body or a smasāna. Both Jambhaladatta and Śivadāsa (eleventh to fourteenth century) postdate the KSS version (1070 C.E.).
13. See Granoff 1998a:222. Near end of this story, the Jain rendition of the tale of Nala and Damayaṃtī, “Dhanna hastened to his house and quickly returned with the milk. Filled with devotion, he gave the great ascetic milk to drink to break his fast.” This version becomes so whitewashed that it has none of the possession of the MBh original.
14. Cf. Harootunian 1988 on early modern Japan.
15. See Bloomfield (1917:9f.), who contends, wrongly, that notions of āveśa began with yoga philosophy and that philosophy and fairytale conspired for “the complete obliteration of the boundary line between fact and fancy” (p. 3). “Nothing is impossible,” he adds, “where the canons of time and space and number, and of every sobering empirical experience have been undermined by such a travesty on scientific thought” (ibid.).
16. Cf., e.g., Kasulis et al. 1993:39–145; more generally, see Bynum 1994, Sheets-Johnstone 1992, and especially LaFleur 1998, on the topic of the body in the study of religion.
17. The cultural resonances of this with the Doonesbury cartoon characters Boopsie and Hunk-Ra (see Chapter 3) are perhaps not too far-fetched.
18. See Lockwood and Bhat 1994:32.
19. Compare this with the central theme in Brinkhaus 1987.
20. I am reminded of Henry James Sr.’s declaration in the 1870s (I cannot remember the source) that individualism was a better idea for men than women because social order depended on women’s willingness to give up “selfhood.” Willing or, more likely, otherwise, the anthropological record bears this out. Indeed, abandoned selfhood, at least selfhood as thought about in the West, does contribute to possession.
21. Pūrvapīṭhikā, pp. 42, 44; e.g., p. 42: yakṣāḥ kaścid adhiṣṭhāya bālacandrikāṃ nivasati, p. 44: bālacandrikām adhiṣṭhitaṃ yakṣaṃ balavantam.
22. Daśakumāracarita, part 2, p. 176: aham asmi bhavajjāmātā bhavadanumatyā vinā tava kanyābhimarṣī.
23. Examples of works we must exclude would, then, be the MBh, Rām, Purāṇas, Brajbhāṣā vārtā literature, with the caveat noted with respect to the MBh.
24. See Chapter 11 and Inden et al. 2000. Despite Inden’s methodological overkill—banning the words “religion” and “ritual,” among others, from his book, which results in clumsiness and obfuscation rather than clarity—the authors’ use of inscriptional and historical sources represents a step forward in historical analysis of South Asian cultural and religious textuality.
25. Lutz 1988:54.
26. Ibid.:4.
27. See Bynum 2001:39ff., for an inquiry into wonder as emotion, based on medieval Christian writings. In constructing a theory of wonder, Bynum subsumes within it terror and disgust (among others), which in South Asia are regarded as independent emotions. She asserts that the “wonder-reaction ranges from terror and disgust to solemn astonishment and playful delight” (p. 57). Notwithstanding the excellent work of Lutz, Nussbaum, Lynch, and others, a great deal remains to be done on the study of emotions across cultures.
28. The most accessible discussions of rasas and their enumeration are Masson and Patwardhan 1969 and Raghavan 1967; cf. the discussion in Chary 1993:55–61. See also Raghavan 1978:427–433, 438–453, which addresses the question of bhāva. Bhoja regards all bhāvas as rasas, in disagreement with Abhinavagupta, cf. ibid.:283–285). With respect to the salvific value of rasa, Bhoja says of śṛṅgāra: yena śṛṅgarīyate sa śṛṅgāraḥ (it is itself the peak and takes men to the peak of perfection). The third stage of rasa is called by Bhoja uttarakoṭi, which synthesizes all the scattered bhāvas within the ahamkāra and turns them into prcman, a stage of divine love. “In this stage every bhāva is a kind of love, preman, and every kind of love is a love of ātman, ahaṃkāra, abhimāna, or śṛṅgāra” (ibid.:440). Thus, Bhoja’s rasa theory is called śṛṅgārādvaita in the Sāhityamīmāṃsā (ibid.:458; Sāhityamīmāṃsā, p. 161).
29. This is the translation in Ingalls et al. 1990:68ff. Abhinavagupta brings out the character of the word itself, which should be translated literally as “one with a shared heart.” On sahṛdaya, Abhinava says that it “denotes persons who are capable of identifying with the subject matter, as the mirror of their hearts has been polished by the constant study and practice of poetry, and also who respond to it sympathetically in their own hearts” (ibid.:70). See also Hardikar 1994.
30. On this, note the discussions in Chapter 2, of the early seventeenth-century Danish missionary to Malabar, Bartholomaeus Ziegenbalg, and the twentieth-century missionary in Panjab, Wayne McClintock.
31. Lutz 1988:63 (emphasis in original).
32. Ibid.:65.
33. Lutz recognizes that emotions might also bear a positive, humanizing value. She writes: “[E]motions are associated, in their positive but secondary sense of the engaged, with the spiritual and the sublime. To have feelings is to be truly human, which is to say, transcendent of the purely physical. Whereas emotions stand in close relationship to the instinctual when contrasted with cognition, they emerge as opposed to the animalistic and physical connotations of the instinctual when contrasted with what can be called the spiritual death of estrangement” (ibid.:66). This, she notes, is the position in American culture. In Indian culture, though, as we can see here, the subjectivity of emotion (or mood) becomes objectified and subject to positivistic categorization. The engagement of emotion and mood with the “spiritual and the sublime” does not mark them as truly or authentically human, but truly and authentically divine as well, and not only “transcendent of the purely physical” but deeply implicit within it.
34. See Gray 2004:4n12 for discussion of its place in the Kanjur.
35. Ibid.:4–5.
36. Knipe 2001. Halliburton is, thus, incorrect in assuming that “popular consumption of elite philosophy may be what makes Kerala unique” (2002:1126). Again: “[W]hat may make Kerala unique is that these elite philosophies and phenomenologies seem to be popularly consumed” (p. 1130); and more specifically: “What Kerala has that other states do not—and what makes its phenomenology unique—is the popular consumption of what would be considered only elite phenomenological discourses in other parts of the country” (p. 1131). The responses to Kṛṣṇa and Rām lilā should also be included in this reckoning (as specified below). Halliburton has cast a very small net then made a dubious claim based on it. In short, his understanding of Indian philosophy and regional cultures is not commensurate with his profound command of anthropological theory.
37. Childhood possession, including of Vīrabhadra, is the main topic of Chapter 11.
38. See Biardeau 1989a; Hiltebeitel 1988, 1991.
39. See Coburn 1984, 1991.
40. Knipe 2001:344.
41. Ibid.
42. Ibid.: 348–349, 351.
43. I am especially indebted to William Sax for discussion on this and some of the following points.
44. Ramanujan 1986a: 69–70.
45. Cf. Hawley 1981:13, 61.
46. See Wulff 1984:20–21 for the differences in emotional comprehension of a Kṛṣṇa līlā performed in Vrindaban and the classical Sanskrit dramas of Rūpa Gosvāmī, one of the foremost exponents of canonizing bhakti as a rasa.
47. See Aṣṭāṅgahṛdaya Saṃhitā 6.4.24 (PP. 495–499 below), for a description of a person possessed by a brahmarākṣasa.
48. Cf. the litany to Rudra in the Krṣṇayajurveda that names those of whom he is the lord: e.g., spirits, dogs, thieves (Taittirīya Saṃhitā 4.5.1–11). See Staal 1983:1:512–525, for a description of the rite in the agnicayana and the text and translation of the TS passage.
49. The offering to Rudra in the agnicayana consists of a stream of milk on the left-wing tip of the completed bird-shaped fire altar, not in the āhavanīya, the main fire into which oblations to the other gods are offered; cf. Staal 1983.
50. Hiltebeitel 1988:267–275 and Chapter 4.
51. See Chapter 10, nn. 27, 32, 34.
52. Rich Freeman has elucidated this in many of his articles.
53. See the remarks of Cort 2001:258.
54. See the edition and translation of the Sanskrit: Yaśodharacarita, ed. Krishnamoorthy (1963:136, 206); for the English translation of the Kannada version, see Janna 1994:32–34. Jaina authors employ the word vyantara (Kannada bantara) to designate a class of nasty ethereal beings. Vāḍirāja does not use this word, but the story is told in Kannada today with the word bantara used for the spirit. (I am grateful to the late D. R. Nagaraj for this information.) The Sanskrit text uses the term nivāsitadaivam to indicate the possession, which the commentator glosses nivāsitabhūtagraham. For more on the topic of the miraculous as a mediator of karma (and disease) in Jainism, see Granoff 1998b.
 