+++
title = "00"

+++
## Intro

Tantrasāra of Abhinavagupta  
Translated from Sanskrit with Introduction and Notes by H.N. Chakravarty  
Edited by Boris Marjanovic  
Preface by Swami Chetanānanda   
Abhinavagupta, Rajanaka.  


स्रोतो [ऽत्र](https://archive.org/details/TantrasaraOfAbhinavaguptaH.N.Chakravarti/page/53/mode/2up) ।

1. Kashmir Saivism-Early works to 1800. 2. Tantrism-Early works to 1800. 3. Abhinayagupta, Rajanaka. Tantrāloka. I. Chakravarty, H.N., 1918-2011, translator, writer of added commentary. II. Marjanovic, Boris, editor. III. Abhinavagupta,

## Contents

Preface by Swami Chetanānanda Foreword by Boris Marjanovic Introduction by H.N. Chakravarty Abhinavagupta's Tantrasāra 

Chapter One Chapter Two Chapter Three Chapter Four Chapter Five Chapter Six Chapter Seven Chapter Eight Chapter Nine Chapter Ten Chapter Eleven Chapter Twelve Chapter Thirteen Chapter Fourteen Chapter Fifteen Chapter Sixteen Chapter Seventeen Chapter Eighteen Chapter Nineteen Chapter Twenty Chapter Twenty-One Chapter Twenty-Two Notes Bibliography: About the Translator 

## Preface 

One day in May of 1980 in South Fallsburg, I was sitting in my room in between programs at the Siddha Yoga Ashram reading some science fiction book, when Muktānanda came in the room. As always, when Swami Muktānanda came in the room, every body's foreheads immediately hit the floor, and that day was no exception.+++(5)+++ Mine was on the floor immediately. The first thing Muktānanda did in looking around the room while I was on the floor was to note there was a book on the bed. He asked me what it was. I told him, and he said, “Don't read that; read Kashmir Saivism." And that began my decades-long interest in the study of what is now called Sakta-Saivism. 

One of the great deficiencies that those of us who have an inter est in Saivism have suffered under is the absence of qualified scholars who are willing to engage in translation projects. The Buddhists are fortunate enough to have living traditions-esoteric Saivism lost its last living lineage holder with the passing of Swami Lakshman Joo-and a great deal of reserve of both cultural and financial capital in the organizations that promote Vajrayana Buddhism, and none of this has existed in support of those of us who have great interest in esoteric Saivism. Because of that, I have caused many different works to become translated.

This particular project has been going on so long, I can't even remember when it started. After Swami Muktānanda passed away, I began visiting Swami Lakshman Joo in Srinagar. I was never really able to stay there long enough to really study with him or to consider myself a student of his, but I was and am a great admirer of him. His blending of intellectual development and a uniquely human quality of compassion was really extraordinary, and he was an extremely beautiful person. Sometime in the early 1990s, how ever, it became too difficult to go to Kashmir, because of the politics of the place. Still intent on continuing my reading and study of Kashmir Saivism, and having met all the Kashmiri pandits, I went to Benares to meet Pandit H.N. Chakravarty. In doing so, I also met many of the people associated with him in Benares, such as Bettina Bāumer and Pandit Kamalakar Mishra, whose work on Kashmir Saivism I published more than a decade ago. At the time I met Pandit Chakravarty, I requested him to translate the Tantrasāra into English, and he agreed. And so we launched on the project, and it was a couple of years later that he delivered a manu script which, in fact, was absolutely unreadable. While his knowledge of Saivism was deep, his English was extremely limited, and there was really nothing I could do about the publication of the manuscript; it was just impossible. So it languished for years, until there was pressure from Chakravarty's side and from some of his friends in Canada for us to do something about the manuscript. What eventually came about was that Boris Marjanovic took on the project, and it was really his effort to bring a readable English translation of the Tantrasāra out that has given renewed life to this project and ultimately brought it to the extremely fine state that it is in. 

Boris Marjanovic deserves an enormous amount of credit for the existence of this manuscript in the quality that it is. I am grate ful to Pandit H.N. Chakravarty and to all of his friends, including Bettina Bāumer, for her support, and I am especially grateful to Boris Marjanovic. 


Swami Chetanānanda  
January, 2012  

## About the Translator

Pandit Hemendra Nath Chakravarty was born in 1918 in the vil lage of Kalihati, in the district of Mymensingh (now in Bangla desh), the son of Taraka Nath Chakravarty, an Ayurvedic phy-. , sician. His family was initiated in the Kaulika tradition and worshiped Daksinā Kālī. He matriculated at the village high school in 1935, and studied Sanskrit and later Sāmkhya at the Balānanda Brahmacharyasram in Deoghar (Bihar). In 1939 he went to Varanasi and studied Nyāya under Pt. Vibhuti Bibhushana Bhattacharya, graduating in 1944 (Nyāya Tīrtha) and 1945 (Tarka Tīrtha) from Calcutta Government Sanskrit Association, and earn ing a B.Ed. in 1950. In 1958 he met the famous pandit Mahama hopadhyaya Gopinath Kaviraj and began to study with him. He remained closely associated with Kaviraj until the latter's death in 1976. He edited the sayings of Anandamayi Ma with the commen tary by G. Kaviraj in Bengali. From 1987 to 1995 he was Chief Pandit in the Kalātattvakosa project of Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, Varanasi Branch, which at that time was directed by Dr. Bettina Bāumer. He wrote articles for Kalātatt vakosa. Beginning in 1972 he taught students and scholars from abroad (includng A.M. Breuinin, M. Dyczkowski, L.M. Finn, D.P. Lawrence, J. Gengnagel, J. Dupuche, A. Wilke, and B. Marja novic) mainly in the field of Hindu Tantrism, especially nondual Kashmir Saivism. In 2003 he received the first “Thakur Jaideva Singh Award” for merit in the field of studying and teaching non dual Kashmir Saivism from the Trika Interreligious Trust (Vara nasi). He passed away on March 30, 2011.

His publications include Nāradiya Purana, 3rd vol. (transla tion with notes), Delhi (Motilal Banarsidass); Tantrasāra by Abhi nava Guptācārya (with Hindi Translation, notes and introduction in English] Varanasi 1986; ed. (with Jaideva Singh and G. Mukho padhyaya): Navonmesha: M.M. Gopinath Kaviraj Smriti Granth (2 vols.), Varanasi 1987. Articles: prāṇa, Bija in: Kalātattvakosa (ed. by B. Bāumer), Vol. I (1988); Bindu, Naabhi, Cakra, in: Kalātatt vakosa Vol. II (1992); “Tantric Spirituality" in: Hindu Spirituality, Postclassical and Modern, ed. K.R. Sundararajan and B. Mukerji, New York, Crossroad, 1997, pp. 209-231; Bahurūpagarbhastotra, An Annotated Translation, in: Sâmarasya, Studies in Indian Arts, Philosophy and Interreligious Dialogue (ed. by S. Das and E. Fūr linger), New Delhi (D.K. Printworld) 2005, pp.37-47.



## Foreword 

Tantrasāra (TS), as its name suggests, is the summary of impor tant notions, principles, doctrines, and practices found in the Tantras in general and in the Tantrāloka (TA) in particular. The TĀ is Abhinavagupta's most extensive work on the principles of nondual Saiva doctrines written in verse, while the TS, which is its summary, is significantly shorter and written in prose. 

It was the tradition of some of the ancient pandits belonging to different schools of Indian thought to write brief and simplified versions of the main principles and doctrines of their schools.+++(4)+++ The purpose of this practice was to provide those interested in the subject but unable to devote years of study to Sanskrit grammar and logic, deemed prerequisites for the study of any other branch of learning, with a simplified and comprehensible overview of the main principles of their respective schools. Abhinavagupta and his disciple Kșemarāja wholeheartedly embraced this practice. As early as the second benedictory verse of the TS, Abhinavagupta declares the complexity, vastness, and depth of the topics discussed in the TĀ as the main reason for writing its short version. 

The primary aim of the TS is to make knowledge easily accessible; thus, Abhinavagupta avoids getting into complex and lengthy philosophical arguments and elaboration, and lays out the subject matter smoothly and concisely. For us, on the other hand, who are attempting to study and to understand this text a millennium later, the brevity of the style of the TS presents a significant chal lenge. Furthermore, the Sanskrit used by Abhinavagupta in the TS is not easy, and the notions and practices found in it are obscure and sometimes incomprehensible. It is because of these difficulties that this text remains inaccessible not only to the general public but also to Sanskrit scholars and Indologists whose specialty is outside of Tantric studies. However, it should be pointed out here that a reader at the time of Abhinavagupta would have experienced significantly less difficulty in understanding this text than we are experiencing today, especially when it comes to ritual practices and observances. The reason for this is that the tradition was alive and its teaching and practices were widespread and therefore understandable to those interested in learning them. 

For example, in Chapter Sixteen, Abhinavagupta speaks of the application of the net (jālaprayoga), the procedure by which the initiator catches the departed souls during the ritual of initiation. There he explains that these departed souls, for one reason or another, hadn't received initiation before their death but deserved to be initiated because of their service to the teacher or some other devout activity. It is the command of śiva, Abhinavagupta further clarifies, that the teacher, through the application of the net, should bring a departed soul to enter the figure of kusha, a grass that represents a departed devotee, and then per form the initiation procedure. This knowledge, according to Abhinavagupta's own admission, was transmitted to him orally by his teacher śambhunātha. It is difficult to fully comprehend from the available sources what the nature, method, and application of this practice were. It seems clear, however, that the power of the deep meditation of the teacher was believed to be the deciding factor for the success of the entire process.

As already pointed out, the brevity of the style of the TS presents a serious difficulty in understanding this text. Fortunately, these doctrines are often discussed at length by the same author in his TĀ as well as in his other works. The translator then is required to read the TĀ along with the TS if intent on grasping the meaning and wider context of topics discussed. Thus, the TĀ and the TS complement each other,+++(5)+++ although on rare occasions the translator is fortunate to find additional information or explanations in the TS itself that were left out and not elaborated on in the TĀ. This conforms to the style of Abhinavagupta that he adopted from his teacher śambhunātha, which was not to keep knowledge completely hidden but also not to reveal it all at one place or in a single book. This, of course, is meant to provide necessary practice for students as well as to test their devotion to knowledge. 

Finally, Abhinavagupta refers to a number of Tantric and other texts that are now lost to us, including the Bhairavakulormi Tantra, Nitya Tantra, Parameśvarānuttara Tantra, Tantrasadbhāva Tantra, Yogasañcāra, and other texts which have clearly influenced his thought. Fortunately, in recent years some of these texts; such as Tantrasadbhāva Tantra were edited and made available to scholars. 

My association with Pandit Chakravarty goes back to 1997. At that time I lived in Varanasi with the intention of reading Sanskrit texts with Prof. Shri Narayana Mishra. Shri Narayana Mishra was the first and the most important of my teachers during the time I worked on my Ph.D. thesis and other projects. It is because of his selfless teaching style that I learned how to read and understand śāstric texts. 

As I was primarily interested in Kashmiri Saiva philosophy and practices, I began to visit the home of Pandit Chakravarty, a renowned Tantric scholar with profound understanding of Kash miri Saivism. His recognition as a scholar was derived from his lifelong study of Sanskrit and its philosophy, but more than that, his recognition came from his close association with Mahamahopādhyaya Gopinath Kaviraj.+++(4)+++ During one of many conversations that we had, I found out that in addition to already publishing his translation of the T'S in Hindi, he had also completed the English translation of the same text. Furthermore, he told me that he had submitted the manuscript for publication to Rudra Press many years ago. However, for reasons unknown to him, the publication of his work had never taken place. It was only several years later when I met Sharon Ward, the head of Rudra Press at that time, that I learned the reason: She explained to me that they felt that the translation was in need of a good editor, which, because of the complexity of the text, they were unable to provide. It was then that she suggested that I work together with Pandit Chakravarty and help him put the translation of the TS into English that would be understandable to a wider audience.

When we began to work together in the summer of 2004, I soon discovered that the problem with Pandit Chakravarty's English translation was not the lack of knowledge of the English language on his part but his desire and insistence on literal translations. Thus, his English translation preserved the syntax of Sanskrit sentences, which, combined with the obscurity of the text, resulted in English sentences that were incomprehensible. We spent the next two years going carefully through the text sentence by sentence. In addition to helping him to express the Sanskrit text in simple and easily understandable English sentences I have written explanatory note for Chapters Twelve through Twenty-Two as well as several notes for Chapter Nine. 

Generally speaking, the problem with reading translations of Sanskrit philosophical texts is that a reader is usually unfamiliar with the style and technical terminology used by the ancient Sanskrit authors. Sanskrit philosophical literature is specialized literature, the understanding of which requires training. Thus, the readers of this translation might find it difficult to grasp the mean ing of some parts of this text. In order to overcome this problem, Pandit Chakravarty conveniently summarized each chapter of TS and included it in his Introduction. I strongly recommend that any one who makes the effort to study this text in depth first carefully read his Introduction. 

Boris Marjanovic  
Los Angeles December 18, 2011  



## Introduction 

### 01

The Tantrasāra begins by stating that perfect knowledge (pūrṇa-prathā) is the cause of liberation. It is the revelation of śiva-nature in one's own Self. śiva, who by His power of freedom (svātantrya śakti) appears to be limited in knowledge and action, removes all veils by the same power.+++(5)+++ As a result of this, He shines in His pristine, self-refulgent, pure consciousness. On the dawn of supreme knowledge of the nature of light (prakāśa), marked by reflective self-knowledge (vimarśa), everything shines non-differently in the mirror of consciousness.+++(4)+++ While describing the nature of mokṣa, Abhinavagupta writes in the Paramārtha-sāra that there is no separate region of it, nor is one to proceed toward it, but it is to be realized by piercing the knots of ignorance by virtue of the full development of one's own power of freedom. However, mokṣa should not be taken as the effect of knowledge (jñāna) and the latter the cause of it, but as the manifestation of the real nature of the Self (ātman). 

According to this śavādvaya system, ignorance is accepted as the cause of saṁsāra, yet the nature of ajñāna is known as āṇava-mala, a limitation innate in the individual. It originates from the absolute freedom of the Lord. The āṇavamala operates in the individual soul in two ways: 

- (i) the loss to consciousness of its freedom, and 
- (ii) the sense of agency without bodha.

- This limitation of jñāna and kriyā is known as spiritual (pauruṣa) and intellectual/ scriptural (bauddha) ignorance (ajñāna). 

Ignorance, known as bauddha-ajñāna, is of the nature of indetermination (aniścaya-svabhāva) and determination of contradictory nature (viparīta-niścaya).+++(4)+++ Because of the presence of the first, the individual soul in bondage fails to definitely know the real nature of the Self, and because of the second one, experiences and feels himself to be the experiencing subject of what is really non-self, such as: body, intellect, prāṇa, etc. Pauruṣa ajñāna, characterized by limited knowledge brought into existence by āṇava-mala, is considered by Abhinavagupta and his tradition to be the cause of worldly existence. 

Pauruṣa ajñāna can be removed by initiation (diksā), but a person cannot avail himself of it while the impurity known as bauddha ajñāna lying in his intellect remains. This is because initiation is necessarily preceded by the firm conviction regarding right knowledge of the things to be avoided, and right knowledge of the things to be accepted (heyopadeya-niścaya). Right knowledge can only be obtained from the sacred literature (śāstra) taught by Parameśvara. He is the highest authority and origin of all sacred literatures. These revealed texts are the givers of release to the souls in bondage. The number of the revealed texts known as āgamas are ten, eighteen, and sixty-four. For Abhinavagupta, the essence of them is the Trika system, and the most important of them is the Mālinīvijaya Tantra. 

Abhinavagupta writes that he will give an exposition of the Mālinīvijaya, for he argues that unless the real nature of things is determined, one will be unable to attain liberation. It is pure knowledge alone that possesses the quality of bestowing release. 

The highest principle, which is of the nature of light, is Śiva. He, the most desirable of all, is one's own unique nature (sva-bhāva). Light (prakāśa) is pure consciousness, which is the very life of everything; though shining in all, it shines as blue and jar distinctly, separate from each other. This notion of separateness, the knowledge of duality, is considered to be ajñāna, but pure consciousness (caitanya) is really knowledge (jñāna). It is universal (sarvasāmānya). It is present everywhere, and possesses absolute freedom of wisdom and activity (jñāna-kriyā-vān). The non-shining of this universal light to the person who is limited is the primary ignorance of the Self. 

The light of which we have spoken above is independent. Its independence means that it depends on nothing. It is all-encompassing, eternal, has the nature of assuming all forms, and at the same time it is without any form (sarvākaranirakāra svābhāva). Its absolute freedom is the "power of bliss" (ānanda-śakti), the relish of one's own bliss (ānanda) is iccha-śakti, its self-reflective light is jñāna-śakti, its unifying relation with all is kriyā-śakti.+++(5)+++ 

śiva, though associated with all His principal śaktis, always remains free from limitations and rests in His blissful nature. When, by His absolute freedom of will, He manifests Himself as limited, He is then known as the bonded soul or limited knowing subject (aṇu). Then, as a result of self-recognition, He again shines as śiva, marked by absolute freedom and unlimited light. By virtue of His absolute freedom, He either shines without any means (anupāya) or sometimes with means (upāya). These upayas, the ways of absorption of the individual consciousness into the divine, may be of the nature of icchā, jñāna, or kriyā. These icchā, jñāna, and kriyā are the śaktis of śiva. When a yogin is able to grasp any of them, it becomes easy for him to attain śiva. As the means (upāya) are three, so the forms of absorption (samāveśa) are also three; hence they are known as śāmbhava, śākta, and āṇava samāveśas. +++(4)+++

This, in short, is the summary of the first chapter of the Tantrasāra. 

### 02

The second chapter begins with a brief presentation of anupāya. Anupāya is not counted under any upaya on account of its subtlety, and even more, because the person on whom the most intense descent of grace (śaktipāta) has fallen does not have any need for internal or external help in order to realize his identity with śiva. The word of the teacher, heard only once, places him on the transcendent path (anuttara-patha), the stable ground of the blissful nature of śakti, upon which he at once realizes the self-manifest Lord as his own very Self.+++(4)+++ 

śiva is eternal; therefore there is no possibility of realizing Him by any means (upāya). As He is self-manifest, the means can not add anything to Him. If it is said that some means would assist in the removal of the veils, then this is untenable, for there is no ultimate existence of any of the veils. In the same way, the question of the merger of the one into the other cannot stand, for there is the total absence of two separate entities. This chain of reason able arguments causes a firm conviction to manifest in the aspirant.+++(5)+++ As a result of this conviction, he realizes that the Absolute, the mass of bliss, is the single Truth, and that śiva is the universal "I am He" in whom everything shines inseparably in the mirror of consciousness. Thus, when firmly contemplated, he finds himself in absorption, in oneness, with the divine. 

In the Tantrāloka, Jayaratha comments that in the śāmbhava, śākta, and āṇava upayas, there is a possibility that duality may arise because of the functioning of icchā, jñāna, and kriyā śaktis; for example, iccha becomes externally inclined because of the presence of something desirable (eṣaṇīya) in the core of icchā.+++(4)+++ On the other hand, in anupāya, because of the functioning of ānanda Śakti, which is said to be Brahman Himself, there is not even a tint of an upāya existing as separate from it.+++(5)+++ 

### 03
The ātman has the characteristics of light and freedom, and is free from all thought constructs (vikalpa). It is śiva, the absolute. It is without parts, the integral whole of infinite light that encompasses everything-the single realm of light where thought does not reach (nirvikalpaika-dhaman). Although an ordinary soul, in its contracted state as a result of the influence of the three impurities (malas), is not different from that light, it is unable to conceive this, and fails to realize its identity with that light. As soon as grace descends on it, even a little, he begins to realize the truth, and by a sudden flash, he is able to perceive that light without the intervention of any upaya.+++(4)+++ This perception is direct and immediate. 

In this perception of light there is no separate entity to be reflected upon. It is of the nature of self-reflection and has the characteristic of vibration. Here the yogin resorts to iccha śakti as a means for realizing his identity with that light. 

The absolute freedom of the Lord (svātantrya-śakti), mentioned above, causes the images of entities (bhāvas) to manifest in the clear mirror of pure consciousness.+++(5)+++ The bhāvas cannot shine by themselves, they shine in the void of consciousness as reflections. For this reason, the Lord is said to be immanent. As this śakti is sentient, not inert, so too is its āmarśa or cognition; that is her self-reflection continues ceaselessly. Her self-reflective nature is known as parā-nāda, which in the āgama literature is represented as a goddess called parāvāk, the Supreme Sound. 

Speech (vāk) is śakti and is not different from reflective awareness (vimarśa). The śaktis which extend and assume the form of the universe are chiefly three: anuttara, icchā, and unmeṣa. Basically, they are nothing but the nature of reflection (parāmarśa), assuming the syllabic form of the letters, such as: “a,” “i," "u."+++(4)+++ It is from them that all the śaktis originate. The fifty syllables of the Sanskrit alphabet come broadly under two groups: the sixteen letters from a to visarga are known as vowels, and the rest, from ka to ha, are consonants. The vowels are the seeds (bījas) and the consonants are the receptacles (yonis) for receiving the seeds.+++(5)+++ 

Primarily, the Lord who is anuttara becomes ānanda, which is the self-reflection of universal consciousness (cit). As cit in its slight vibration becomes intent on externality, it is known as ānanda. Similarly, icchā becomes īśāna when it rests in icchā.+++(?? 4)+++ In the same way, ūrmi is the reflective unmeṣa.+++(4)+++ As syllables, these three are indicated by "a,” "i", "u.” From u onward, kriyā śakti begins to function. The former three parāmarśas have the characteristics of prakāśa.+++(4)+++ Hence, they are of the nature of the sun, and the latter parāmarśas, the long vowels "ā," "ī,” “ū," are of the nature of soma or moon, with the characteristic of rest. +++(5)+++

When icchā and īśāna become inclined toward activity, or, in other words, when activity enters them, disturbance sets in, which causes a break within that tranquility. Then icchā and īśāna are known as iṣyamāṇa. In one, the light is predominant, while the other is of the nature of rest. They are known as “r̥," "r̥̄", "l̥", "l̥̄". They are the only semivowels, and are unlike the consonant sounds of ra and la; therefore they are not considered consonants as such. Since they retain both the vowel and consonant sounds, they are considered to be neuter.+++(4)+++ 

The creative movement which proceeds to flow from anuttara gives rise to different syllables. The impelling force of kriyā śakti terminates after giving rise to the varṇas like "e," "ai," "o," and "au." After that, the inward movement begins to operate. As a result of this, the resultants are then put to rest in anuttara. It is to be noted here that this anuttara is different from anuttara known as akāra, the supreme Bhairava.+++(4)+++ It manifests as aṁ, which is pure consciousness in essence. From that anuttara, visarga unfolds. 

Visarga, better known as visarga-śakti, is the creative force which manifests herself as the universe.+++(5)+++ She remains inseparably united with the Absolute before the rise of agitation in it. The universe as we see it is the manifestation of light as indicated objects (vācya), and in turn, the reflection of that light stands for each of the indicative sounds as represented by "a," "ā,” “i," etc. The manifestation that occurs in this twofold way (vācya and vācaka) is, in reality, the manifestation of vāk, the supreme speech. The supreme, known as akula, is possessed of power (śakti) which gives rise to the universe. This power is called kaulikī Śakti. She retains the universe within herself in a very subtle form, but because of the creative impulse expands herself in three stages. These stages of creation are internal but are projected externally by the Lord by means of His visarga śakti. Creation, as known to us, is predominantly of the nature of difference or duality (bheda); this is the gross form of creation. In the language of the āgamas, it is known as āṇava visarga, creation on the objective level. The creation in which difference and nondifference (bhedābheda) shine is called śākta visarga; this is the subtle form of creation.+++(4)+++ The creation of nondual nature is known as śāmbhava visarga, the subtlest of all creations. 

āṇava visarga shines externally in a gross form. The entire creation consists of the instrument of knowledge and the object of knowledge (pramāṇa and prameya), and knowledge with its limited nature shines as mutually different and also different from the Self. In śākta visarga, however, the universe shines in a dual nondual relation. In āṇava visarga, difference is predominant. It is of the characteristic of ha, while in śākta visarga, all that is experienced (seen, heard, touched, etc.) by the self is obliterated. The universe becomes perfectly intent on pure consciousness. It is the awakening of citta toward cit. Citta, though cit by nature, in its empirical consciousness becomes the experiencing subject, and in its view all objects shine as different from it. This occurs due to the subject object relationship. Because of this relationship, the universe shines with a variety of objects. At this stage, cit, the experiencing subject of the world-picture, descends down to the level of citta by imposing upon itself the limitations of objects. 

In śākta visarga, citta is not shining as the subject and its objects with their mutual differences, but rather, it is shining as one with consciousness. In the former case, the resting and terminating of citta is in objects having limitations, while here it is submerging all sorts of limitations into all-inclusive pure consciousness. For this reason, it is known as citta sambodha, the awakening of citta; that is, in this stage, citta becomes intent on offering itself in the partless nature of śiva, who is characterized as integral Light. 

In śāmbhava visarga, however, there shines neither difference nor non-difference; even the universe is absent there; moreover, not even the slightest trace of citta is perceptible. It shines as universal consciousness (cit), free from all limitations, and remains completely refulgent in its perfection. This is the highest visarga, characterized by ānanda. 

The person who has realized his identity with that light experiences that everything from the earth to śiva shines in the mirror of consciousness. The very nature of śāmbhavopāya is this kind of comprehension. Abhinavagupta has presented this idea in the Tantrāloka in this way: Bhairava, the clear void of consciousness, creates the picture of the universe in Himself. He manifests it and experiences: “I am the universe.” Thus, He assumes an immanent nature; this is His function of creation. Then, He maintains the six-fold paths and experiences them as being reflected in Himself Thus, He is the one who manifests maintenance. Lastly, the entire universe is withdrawn and dissolved into the flame of all-consum ing fire; this is His function of dissolution. 

The person who is able to realize the partless one as the single, integral unity of consciousness in which these three functions-creation, maintenance, and dissolution-have their rise and rest, is absorbed in the supreme by means of śāmbhavopāya. 

### 04 

The highest end for human beings is to attain the very nature of Parāmaśiva, who is ever free from determinacy or “thought constructs” (vikalpa). One is able to rid oneself of thought constructs by means of pure reasoning (sat-tarka), by listening to holy texts known as āgamas, and by following the teachings of a spiritual teacher. The practice of contemplating or viewing everything as the essential reality (śiva) is the means by which one is able to rise above impure thought constructs (aśuddha-vikalpas). The tantrasāra states that one considers oneself bound because of vikalpas. The wrong conception of one's true nature as body, etc., is the cause of mundane existence; however, when a vikalpa of the opposite nature pure “thought construct" (śuddha-vikalpa) is born, it dispels the wrong kind of thought construct, places one on the right path, and enables one to attain the highest good. 

Though pure thought constructs are of no avail in revealing the nature of Parāmaśiva, the supreme reality, for it is everywhere and in every way ever luminous, it is the considered opinion of the author that pure vikalpas remove the sense of duality from the Self.+++(4)+++ The sense of duality is not something positive, but is only ignorance (akhyāti) of one's essential nature. This sense of duality is removed by pure thought constructs (śuddha-vikalpa). 

Pure knowledge (śuddha-vidya) leads to sattarka, or pure reasoning. One should bear in mind that sat-tarka is distinct from the form of gross reasoning as understood in the Nyāya system, for it is said that sat-tarka arises by itself in a person whom śakti has keenly touched.+++(4)+++ This tarka leads to the continuity of ideas similar to śuddha-vikalpa. It is stated in the Tantrasāra: The supreme reality is unlimited by nature and consists of an undivided singularity of consciousness. It transcends all the principles of limited nature which terminate in śiva. This renders stability to all and is the vitality of universe. Through it the universe "throbs" with life, and that is “I” (aham).+++(5)+++ 

The continuous practice of sat-tarka regarding the nature of reality brings about the purity of "thought constructs.". The highest excellence of sattarka terminates in bhāvanā, by which one is able to make manifest as distinct even the most indistinct. 

In some, sattarka may arise by itself, without the need for recourse to any spiritual guide or the reading of holy texts. When it is enlivened in a person, he is considered to have been initiated by the luminous goddesses of his own consciousness (samvid-devis), the deities personifying consciousness itself.+++(5)+++ 

However, the person on whom the grace of the Lord has descended less keenly should be initiated by the spiritual teacher, after which he is able to secure the right of listening to āgamas, which by their proper understanding help one to become free from doubts. Afterwards, the truth that is contained in the āgama gives rise to sattarka in him. 

Sat-tarka is the light of "pure knowledge" (śuddha-vidyā). It is considered to be the most excellent and direct limb of yoga.+++(5)+++ It is stated in the Tantra-sāra that yoga is also a kind of vikalpa, but that it is characterized by intensive awareness (anusandhānātmā) regarding essential reality. For the purpose of keeping the essential reality ever luminous in his view, the yogin takes recourse to this form of vikalpa for the maturity of his awareness. 

Parameśvara is by nature pure consciousness and is ever full. His fullness is His śakti, the Divine I-consciousness.+++(4)+++ By the grace of śuddha-vidyā, one has recourse to cit śakti, which finally leads the aspirant to śambhu, the Lord. 

### 05
When a thought construct (vikalpa) cannot become pure by itself, and one has to depend on other means for its purification, the aspirant is decidedly staying in the lower stage of spiritual development; in other words, in him śaktipāta has occurred to a lesser degree. Therefore, for the purification of vikalpas, and because he is limited himself, he resorts to means that are also limited. Hence, the individual takes up practices of the intellect (buddhi), vital energy (prāṇa), or the body itself for this purpose.+++(5)+++ 

Among these kinds of aspirants, those more advanced proceed on the path of meditation (dhyāna). The Tantrasāra gives a brief account of how this contemplative meditation is to be performed: Though it is called dhyāna, it is quite distinct from the dhyānas found in various holy texts, especially those in which the aspirant imagines his desired deity as having a face and limbs. 

The Tantrasāra describes dhyāna in the following manner: In the core of his conscious heart, the aspirant meditates upon the self-luminous essential reality, which abides in all. This meditation is to be performed in such a way that the three-namely, the subject, the instrument of knowledge, and the object, representing fire, the sun, and the moon, respectively-have coalesced together and become the unity of a single mass of consciousness. This meditation is to be continued as long as they have their separate identities, until they shine as one light and blaze up as the fire of the great Lord. This fire is to be meditated upon as surrounded by twelve Kālīs. These Kālīs are none but the flames of the wheel of fire. This fire should be thought of as emitting rays through out lets such as the eyes, which take their rest on the object of external senses. The object is to be thought of as being nourished by the creative energy of the moon, then it is maintained and made manifest by the sun, and finally it is dissolved by the energy of fire so that it may be drawn inside and made transcendent (anuttara).+++(5)+++ 

When this type of dhyāna is continuously performed, the aspirant quickly realizes that every object and idea is nothing but the essence of pure consciousness. He further realizes that creation and other functions are essentially the play of the Lord. 

After dhyāna, the text gives a description of uccāra. The upward movement of prāṇa is commonly known as uccāra; how ever, uccāra has the characteristics of spanda, which is the very soul of it. 

prāṇa is of two kinds, one general (sāmānya) and the other specific (viśeṣa). In the former, difference of any sort is totally absent, while in the latter, because of distinct activities, the same prāṇa shows itself in five forms, known as prāṇa, apāna, samāna, udāna, and vyāna. It is quite evident that these five have their base in the general prāṇa. 

Because of the vibrating movement of prāṇa, inarticulate sound, known as the "unstruck” sound (anāhatanāda), becomes : manifest. It sounds continuously, without any break, in the heart of every living being. This nāda is associated with two bījas, namely sr̥ṣṭi-bīja (sa) and samhāra-bīja (ha). 

The activity of prāṇa functions without any conscious effort on the part of the living being. Usually prāṇa moves along the chan nels of ida and pingala. The middle path remains blocked for the ordinary human being. When, by the grace of the spiritual teacher, the middle path opens up, then the aspirant's journey toward the supreme begins. 

The aspirant realizes that the movement of prāṇa is associated with Śakti. It is she who, in the form of hamsa, is moving forward and is the real mover of prāṇa. At that time, the aspirant realizes that she gets the two bījas nourished in the two places of their origin, namely, the heart (hrdaya) and dvādaśānta, the top of the head. Upon this realization, the yogin feels that the prāṇa, before its rise, takes rest in the void of the heart; then, by its externalization as apāna, the external objects not only shine forth but also get nourished by apāna, the moon. The yogin then experiences the all-pervasive nature of prāṇa. On account of specific activities of prāṇa in various parts of the body, the yogin experiences various kinds of delights according to his aptitude in causing the prāṇa to rest in these spots. These delights (ānanda) are named nirānanda and others. They are six in number. 

By the experience of these delights in different parts of the body, he finally realizes that the highest place of rest is some where other than the body and prāṇa. Ultimately, he realizes the highest form of delight, known as universal bliss (jagadānanda), in which there is no limitation, for it shines in all directions and where ever-shining consciousness alone remains. It expresses itself as the knower, the means of knowledge, and the known objects. It expands by the nectar of the divine joy of absolute sovereignty, in which there is no need for contemplation. 

It should be noted here also that prāṇa and apāna are two factors which perform the functions of dissolution and creation, while samāna balances the two pulls of energy in the inner viṣuvat, the void. Then udāna, the upper current, begins to flow along the middle path. Finally, the vital energy becomes vyāna, the all pervading one in which all limitations have their end. 

The yogin, by means of his close observation of two bījas mentioned above, should make his vikalpas free from impurities. Then, according to his proficiency of entering the place of rest : in different parts of the body (viśranti), he first experiences the delights (ānandas) mentioned above, followed by udbhava, kampa, nidrāi, and ghūrni. The bodily centers where they are experienced are known as mūlādhāra, kanda, hrdaya, telu, and dvādaśānta. Dvādaśānta, which is known also as urdhvakuṇḍalinī, is the place where the difference of śakti and śiva ends. It is of the characteristic of “vibration of consciousness" (samvitspanda). 

The inarticulate sound (anahātanāda) is ever present, but it becomes manifest by the rhythmic movement of prāṇa, which gives rise to varṇa, or syllabic sound. It should be borne in mind that this nada is not properly called varna, as it is the cause of syllables. Seed mantras (bījas) known as sr̥ṣṭi and saṁhāra (sa and ha) are the two chief syllables in association with which anahātanāda becomes manifest. Therefore, the yogin tries to fix his mind in them so that he may get the touch of nāda. He practices hearing the nāda by uttering different syllables either ending in a vowel or not ending in any vowel, for he knows that nāda abides in all the varnas, latent in an undivided form. Even by calling to mind the ever-sounding nāda he experiences identity with pure consciousness. 

INTRODUCTION 13 

### 06 

Chapter Six describes the method for the realization of essential reality by external means. In the preceding chapter, Abhinavagupta describes āṇavopāya, which helps the aspirant attain absorption into the divine Self through the means of uccāra, dhyāna, varṇa, and karaṇa. The present section discusses how a yogin adopts prāṇavāyu as the means for attaining his or her desired goal. 

From this chapter onward, whatever is described up to Chapter Twelve comes under the “formation of the place" (sthāna-prakalpana). The locations are three: the vital energy, the body, and other external objects. 

The six paths (adhvas) are immense. They have their base in general prāṇa, while the adhva known as time (kāla) has its base in a specific prāṇa. 

The objects shine in two ways, either with sequence or with out any sequence. The act of confining anything within limits (kalana) is the function of time (kāla). Although pure consciousness is free from all limiting adjuncts, the universe in the form of the knower and the known is made manifest by its freedom of will. As a result, they shine forth with their distinctive and limited character. The agency of the delimiting power of consciousness is known as kāla śakti, which is power in the form of time. However, before the apparent externalization of objects, sequence and non sequence remain latent in its pure nature. The entire universe not only remains inseparably one with the light (prakāśa), but in order to show itself as limited, prakāśa at first negates the universe and experiences “I am transcending the universe." Thus, the void (śūnya) transcending everything is known as śūnya pramātā, the knowing subject of the void. 

Because of its association with impurity (āṇava mala), the knowing subject of the void (sūnya pramātā) becomes externally inclined, and the universe that was previously rejected or negated is now thought of as the most desirable object. Then a vibrating upsurge occurs in it, which shows itself as prāṇa. 

Prāṇa is the first expansion of consciousness. It shows itself as spanda, the very nature of self-reflection. For this reason, prāṇa is said to be predominantly of the nature of the power of activity (kriyā śakti). Therefore, though it is inert (jada), it is primarily of the nature of consciousness. For this reason, by resorting to prāṇa, the aspirant is able to attain the supreme reality. 

Prāṇa is the very life of every living being. It is always on the move. Because of its activities in different locations of the body, the universal prāṇa is known as prāṇa, apāna, samāna, udāna, and vyāna. Of these five, prāṇa and apāna function as the activity of inhaling and exhaling. The incoming movement of the breath starts from the heart and ends "twelve fingers above one's head," known as dvādaśānta, while the outgoing movement of the breath starts from dvādaśānta and ends at the heart. This movement con tinues and goes on functioning 21,600 times in a single day. 

prāṇa is the manifest form of śakti, and all the six adhvas -namely, varṇa, mantra, and pada on the one hand, and kalā, tat tva, and bhūvana on the other-have their respective locations in it. It is to be noted here that adhvas are generally known as paths which lead the aspirant in a sequence to the supreme. In the end, however, for the one in whom the right view of nonduality has developed, these adhvas become absorbed in I-consciousness. For this reason, adhvas are not simply paths but are also something that is absorbed. 

Hence the yogin makes an effort to realize the supreme real ity by resorting to prāṇa, and thus puts an end to the mutations caused by the impelling force of time. 

By its nature prāṇa is constantly vibrating. This vibration arises spontaneously in the location of kanda (bulb) below the generative organ. The spontaneous movement of prāṇa bestows little spiritual result in comparison with the movement of the vital energy that is caused by the conscious effort of the yogin. Hence, by his deliberate effort in association with jyeștha śakti, the yogin tries to impel his prāṇa from the center of the heart along the path upward so that it may reach the dvādaśānta, twelve fingers above one's head. After letting it rest there, it is made to move again toward the heart. This ingoing and outgoing process is sim ply known as inhaling and exhaling, but to the yogin it means something else. In the primary stage, the yogin with keen observa tion watches each movement of prāṇa rising in the heart, proceed ing upward and coming back into the heart again. He divides the whole course of prāṇa into sixteen divisions. Each of these sixteen divisions is known as tuṭi, representing a day. Similarly, the exha lation represents a night. When the yogin becomes sufficiently proficient, he then takes each movement of prāṇa and apāna to represent a month. 

The course along which prāṇa and apāna move measures thirty-six digits (anguli). The yogin assumes that the hour, the tithi, and other long and short units of time get their rise in prāṇa. It should be noted here that kriyā śakti, which operates externally as kāla śakti in prāṇa, is without any definite form. For this rea son, whatever shines in prāṇa as measures of very small amounts of time, such as kṣana, lava, and so forth, may shine as a year or more than several years. Not only do they shine and rise in it, but they also terminate in the highest equilibrium. 

When prāṇa runs the course of two and one-quarter digits, the duration is known as a tuṭi. Four of such tuṭis make a prahara, while half of a tuṭi is known as gap (sandhyā). The exhaling and the inhaling represent the day and the night. 

In the same way, the yogin also conceives that a month, consist ing of thirty lunar days (tithis) with broad divisions of two fort nights, rises in prāṇa. All the tithis from the first day of the lunar fortnight (pratipad) to the night of new moon (amāvāsya), and then again from pratipad to the full moon day (pārṇima), lie along the course of the inhaling and exhaling movement of prāṇa and apāna. The sixteenth tithi, consisting of half a tuṭi at the start and another half at the final resting place, is considered to be the san dhyā, the meeting point of the day and the night. These two halves of tuṭis are free from the influence of time, and for this reason sandhyās are considered to be very auspicious. Similarly, during the dark fortnight, the moon or the apāna offers its digits (kalā) one by one to prāṇa, the sun, and the final one is offered near the dvādaśānta at the fifteenth tuṭi, after which the moon itself gets dissolved into the sun. This is known as amāvāsya, when the moon remains latent in the kalā known as ama. When the span of one half of the tuṭi occupied by amāvāsya gets into the portion of pratipad, the duration of the tithi is cut short and therefore a solar eclipse occurs. The eclipse obliterates the difference of the know ing subject (pramātā), the instrument of knowledge (pramāṇa), and the objects known (prameya). Therefore, the occasion is con sidered to be auspicious because it bestows otherworldly results. 

Similarly, a year is supposed to get its rise in a single move ment of prāṇa. For this reason, the entire course of the movement of prāṇa and apāna corresponds with uttarayaṇa (the progress of the sun to the north) and dakśināyaṇa (the progress of the sun to the south). In this case, the tithis occupy only one-fifth of a digit and the "sun's passage from one sign of the zodiac (rāśi) to another” (samkrānti) occurs every six digits. 

For the purpose of minimizing the influence of time, the yogin further strives to get twelve years to rise in a single movement of prāṇa and apāna. He locates sixty tithis in a digit, and the passage of one rāsi to another is supposed to be the duration of a year. In this way, he is able to observe the duration of twelve years in the single movement of prāṇa and apāna. 

Like prāṇa, time is thought to arise in apāna. It arises in the heart and goes down to mūlādhāra. Just as Brahmā and others are supposed to be the causal deities residing in different locations, namely, in the heart and other places as mentioned above, in the same way, they are said to have their locations in the heart and other places down to kanda, etc. The yogin meditates upon the dei ties as the causal agents of the stages of childhood, youth, old age, death, rebirth, and liberation of the embodied soul. From Brahmā to Anasrita, these six are considered to be the cause of different states through which a living being must pass. As they give rise to these stages of life, in the beginning they are accepted by the yogin, but are ultimately rejected by him. To him, the most accept able object is the supreme Goddess, the seventh, called unmanā. Once the aspirant is united with unmanā, it is possible for him to reach beyond these states. 

The movement of apāna ends in the dvādaśānta, otherwise known as the yoginivaktra. If the yogin is able to find rest there, the distinctions of the upper and the lower will be put to rest forever. 

This method is followed similarly in samāna. Samāna arises in the navel, flows along the 72,000 nādis of the body, and becomes manifest in the heart. It flows along the ten principal nādis: idā, piṇgalā, suṣumnā, gandhari, hastijihva, alambuśa, puśa, kuhu, and samkhini; but of these, the first three are the most important. The heart is like a lotus with eight petals pointing to eight direc tions. Because of its association with eight directions, it imitates the activities of the Lord of directions, and appears to be cruel or placid. It is known as samāna because it remains uniformly in the body. Just as an equinox (viṣuvat) occurs in prāṇa, similarly, the yogin ascertains five passages (samkrantis) and two equinoxes (viṣuvats) during one day. They also occur during the night in the same way. It is well known that visuvats are the equinoxes, when the day and night are of equal duration. This time is considered to be very auspicious. 

The movement of udāna proceeds from the heart up to the dvādaśānta, a center of prāṇa twelve fingers above the head. The yogin tries to watch the entire measure of time from one tuṭi to sixty years in the single movement of udāna. It is thought to have the characteristic of vibration (spandarūpa). Vyāna is all-perva sive by nature, and so it is free from sequence; still, time arises there in the form of a subtle vibration. 

The subtle forms of the vowels of the Sanskrit alphabet (varnas) arise without any effort, but in their gross forms, the varṇas rise through personal effort. The syllables are of three kinds: transcendent, subtle, and gross. The transcendent are of two kinds: parātama is the highest form that preserves a distinc tion among the vowels, while nāda is an uncreated sound, hence it is known as anāhata, a sound that resounds ceaselessly without beginning or end. It is united with all the syllables as their source, and in this sense is the supreme transcendent form of sound with out distinctions. 

### 07
In the seventh chapter, the text presents deśādhva, the path of space. It consists of objects of multifarious forms made manifest by the Lord by means of His power of activity. The form of any of these objects, such as house, courtyard, market, temple, garden, or forest, which are different from one another, shines to a limited subject only as being mutually distinct from one another, and also from the subject himself. To the Lord, who is perfect and there fore free from all limitations, all subjects and objects shine as his very Self. In reality, these forms have their substratum in pure consciousness, and so they shine nondifferently from it. In its free will, consciousness (saṁvid) veils its pure nature and manifests before the view of the limited subject as sūnya, prāṇa, and buddhi, and from this the embodied soul sees pictures of objects as distinct from the experiencing subject. Thus, sūnya, prāṇa, and buddhi shine externally as objects, but really they are not different from the Self. 

The adhvas have their locations in sūnya, prāṇa, in all the nādi cakras, and in the body itself. As they proceeded from con sciousness, they are to be dissolved into it by involutionary meth ods. As the adhvas are vast, it is practically impossible, even for a yogin, to do so in an eon of ages. 

Therefore, one should know, first of all, the real nature of these adhvas. They have their real resting place in consciousness, and through it sarvid, the entire adhva (consisting of the void, the intellect, the vital energy, and everything), whether it abides in the body, the image of a deity, or the sacrificial altar, becomes complete. When the aspirant is able to realize this, he dissolves them into Brahmā, the Lord of Brahmanda; then, the tattvas from 

INTRODUCTION 19 

purusa to kalā are dissolved into Viṣnu, who is their Lord; then, māyā, the knot (granthi) into Rudra, upon which māyā is to be dissolved into Isvara, who is its Lord; then, śuddhavidyā should be dissolved in Sadāśiva, and Anasrita śiva is to be dissolved in śakti and śiva; and finally all of them are dissolved into Parāśiva, the all-pervading One. 

The Tantric text called Trisira Bhairava presents pure con sciousness as if it were a tree, consisting of three portions. The extreme fringe, the root, is known as bodhamūla, where “this ness" is predominant; it is the gross form of bodha (conscious ness). The middle portion of that tree is not predominantly dual in nature because, though it shines as "this-ness." here, it has merged with consciousness. The most perfect is bodha, the uppermost part of that tree, where there is no separate existence. This state is known as bodhāgra, the highest consciousness, where everything has its existence without any separate distinction but shines non differently from pure consciousness. 

From this, it is evident that all the adhvas, consisting of thirty six tattvas, are not different from Parāśiva, the Supreme. One who is able to realize the most delightful adhvas as nondifferent from his own consciousness can attain śivahood without delay. 

This chapter gives a detailed account of all the tattvas from the earth onward, and the bhuvanas contained in each. 

### 08
In the previous chapter we saw that worlds (bhuvanas) are the expansion of śakti, which keep all the multifarious forms of sub jects and their objects of experience within herself. Permeating them all is the highest universal, known as Parāmaśiva, who remains ever shining. That which is less pervasive than the high est universal, present in some bhuvanas but absent in others, is defined as a tattva; for example, solidity, firmness, and grossness are all qualities found in Brahmānda alone. 

The next discussion in this chapter is the relationship of cause20 TANTRASĀRA 

and effect (kāryakaranabhāva). According to this system, the relation is of two kinds, namely, the transcendent (pāramārthika) and the artificial or fictional (kalpita). The transcendent relation is such that, because of the Lord's freedom of will, because He is a free agent, everything beginning with śiva and ending in the earth shines nondifferently from Him and rests in Him. The artificial relation of the cause and the effect, however, is such that every thing follows a regular sequence. The relation of cause and effect is created by His power of niyati. According to this system, the rod, the wheel, and clay, considered essential for producing a jar, are only expedients. The real cause is the Lord, for He remains associated with all of them as the cause and the effect. In order to support this view, it is stated that it is He who brings all the causes together and sets them apart. The impelling force of universal consciousness is considered to be the real agent of everything. When the potter makes a jar, he himself is one with that universal consciousness who is the real doer. 

Parāśiva is perfect and full with His five Śaktis. These śaktis are inseparably united with their Lord and are manifested in five aspects by His free will. These five are: cit, ānanda, icchā, jñana, and kriyā. The five principles, namely śiva, śakti, sadāśiva, īśvara, and śuddhavidyā, are the manifestations of the śaktis men tioned above. It should be noted here that śakti is one and affluent with all the śaktis, but due to the dominance of one over the other, distinctions are also observed among them. For example, in śiva tattva, consciousness (cit) is predominant; when ānanda becomes dominant, it is called śakti tattva. The lords of the five pure prin ciples are Śiva, Śakti, Sadāśiva, īśvara, and Ananta. These five beginning with śiva and ending in Ananta have their respective ganas or hosts. They are named śāmbhava, śākta, mantreśvara, and mantra. This is known as pure path or adhva. 

The impure adhva is created by the will of the Lord for ful filling the desires of limited souls. Aghora is the creator of the impure adhva by causing agitation (kṣobha) in māyā. 

INTRODUCTION 21 

The principle called māyā is the material cause of the insen tient universe. It should be remembered in this context that the māyā śakti, belonging to the Lord, is that which manifests māyā the material cause, and is quite different from māyā, the principle or tattva. The entire universe is born of māyā tattva, from which kalā is born. It, in turn, is responsible for the rise of limited power of action in the limited soul. Māyā veils the pure conscious state of the self for which it loses its power of knowledge and activity. 

Kalā, though born of māyā tattva and being impelled by its force, becomes attached to the limited soul. These two, that is, kalā and aṇu, remain firmly attached to each other, so they cannot be easily differentiated. Those who remain under the influence of māyā tattva fail to get release so long as they do not receive grace from Ananta, the Lord of māyā tattva. Only then can puruṣas differentiate themselves from māyā, and as a result they become vijñānākala souls. Similarly, when one realizes his distinction from prakrti, he never goes below prakrti; and when one realizes one's distinction from kalā, one doesn't go beyond kalā tattva. When the residual trace of the malas become totally absent from the soul, he becomes one with śiva. 

It is to be remembered in this connection that the kalā tattva is the giver of limited activity to the limited soul. The impure vidyā bestows on the insentient subject a limited cognitive power. Only because of its presence is the limited subject able to see the real 

e intellect, and distinguish happiness and others from the mass of objects which are reflected in the mirror of buddhi. "I know something” and “I do something” are the forms of judgment aroused by vidyā and kalā, respectively. 

These rāga, vidyā, kalā, kāla, and niyati are of two types; because of grace, they are considered pure and therefore function as means for the attainment of śivahood. Kalā tattva becomes pure when it consists of activities like worshipping, etc., rāga tat tva becomes so when it gives rise to attachment to the Lord. Vidya becomes pure when it causes discernment regarding the Lord. In 

22 TANTRASĀRA 

the same way, kāla provides potency to the teachings regarding the Lord (tadupadeśādi viṇayameva kalanam), while niyati sup ports the soul in remaining steadfast in His worship. 

The group of kalā and other tattvas are different according to the difference of the individual souls, for the activity in them is seen to rise differently in different limited subjects. 

It is noteworthy that the agenthood with the characteristic of limited nature gives rise to pradhana, the equilibrium of the three guṇas, i.e., sattva, rajas, and tamas. The supreme Subject in the beginning is made limited by māyā, which takes away all of His glory. He is bestowed again with a little of His glory by means of kalā tattva and so on. Thus, He becomes a pasu, a limited subject, and the māyā, kāla, rāga, vidya, niyati, kalā tattvas serve Him as veils (kañcukas). 

The author further points out that prakrti is of two kinds. One is the equilibrium of the gunas; the other is guna tattva itself which, being disturbed by the predominant Lord of the tattva, causes agitation (kṣobha) in praksti, which in turn gives rise to the principle of buddhi. Prakrti should be accepted as the recipient of the agitation, otherwise it would not be possible for the liberated soul to remain uninvolved in bondage. According to this system, the disturbance (ksobha) in prakrti is caused by the Lord Himself. 

Ahamkāra arises from buddhi, which sees the light of puruṣa as if in a mirror that has become slightly impure, and because of its contact with objects it makes one experience “I know this" and "I do this." Thus it feels identity with the object and thinks of itself as "I." Buddhi receives the reflection of objects and at the same time, though insentient, manifests the light of puruṣa. From ahamkāra that is predominantly sattvika in nature come the five inner and external sense organs, from rajasa ahamkāra arises manas, and from the tamasa nature of ahamkāra the five tanmātras are born. Thus the tanmatras give rise to five gross elements: ether (nabhas), air (vāyu), fire (tejas), water (apa), and earth (prthvī). 

This chapter discusses all thirty-six principles, which are mutu 

INTRODUCTION 23 

ally related to one another. These are classified in a threefold divi sion consisting of nara, Śakti, and śiva. Śiva pervades all by His characteristic nature of luminous consciousness. The principle in which this characteristic of light is more prominent is considered more extensive than the other. For example, śiva is more extensive than śakti, while the latter is more so than nara. 

### 09
This chapter classifies all the tattvas grouped under fifteen aspects as viewed by the seven kinds of knowing subjects: śiva, mantramaheśvara; mantreśvara, mantra, vijñānākala, pralaya kala, and sakala. These subjects each possess one of seven śaktis; thus counting the śaktis and the possessors of these śaktis, the number becomes fourteen. Including svarūpa, which refers to the "object in itself," with these fourteen, each of the tattvas from prthvī to prakrti has fifteen aspects. 

The Lord possesses three śaktis in the form of the goddesses as parā, parāparā, and āparā parā. The transcendent śakti func tions as the subject (pramātā). She is parā śakti, who is insep arably united with the supreme Subject. The goddess parāparā śakti is the instrument (pramāna), and āparā śakti operates as the object of experience (prameya). 

The earth and other tattvas have their distinctive svarūpa; that is, they are objects in themselves. In other words, the tattvas from praksti down to the earth shine as objects without having the reflection of any of the limiting adjuncts of the subject and its instruments. This is said to be the pure nature of each object; its existence does not rest in the subject. The object has its rest in itself, meaning that it exists independently of the limits of ord nary sense perception. 

It should be noted in this context that the object as such shines in this distinctive way by the grace of aparā śakti. The pure objec tive aspect of all the tattvas from the earth to prakrti broadly comes under the nara group, the basic concept of Trika as charac 

24 TANTRASĀRA 

terized by nara, śakti, and śiva. When śaktis related to different subjects become predominant, however, and the object in its turn rests in them, this is known as its śākta form. It shines thus by the grace of parāparā śakti. These śākta forms are seven, because the numbers of śaktis related to the different subjects are seven in number; but when the subject possessing these śaktis becomes predominant and the objects rest in the knowing subjects, it is known to be of the form of śiva, who is the possessor of the śaktis (śaktimān). They shine thus by the grace of parā śakti. The subject characterized as possessing a particular śakti, that is, a śaktimān, is of seven kindṣ. 

The first of these seven subjects, known as sakala, has vidyā and kalã as its śaktis, but they lie dormant in pralayākala souls, and though they are abiding in vijñānākala, it is as if they are disappearing. In the subject known as mantra, vidya and kalā function as pure knowledge (suddhvidyā), about to become awake, but the residual trace of it is still there. Mantreśa knowing subject is free from the above residual traces and śuddhavidyā has awak ened fully in them. This very śuddhavidyā is going to become icchāśakti in mantramahesvara, while in śiva it becomes fully manifest icchā with the characteristic of svatantryaśakti. 

The whole scheme may be presented by the following chart: 

(1) Prameya 

(2) Pramāna Vidyā/Kalā 

(i) Prthivi to Praksti 

Svarūpa = 1 7+7+1=15 

(3) Pramātā (a) Sakala (b) Pralayakala (c) Vijñānākala (d) Mantra (e) Mantresa (f) Mantramahesa (g) śiva 

(ii) Puruṣa to Kalā 

Vidy, and 

Kalā are dormant. (a) Pralayākala 

(b) Vijñānākala 

INTRODUCTION 25 

Svarūpa = 1 

6+6+1=13 (iii) Pralayākala 

Svarūpa = 1 

5+5+1=11. (iv). Vijñānākala 

(c) Mantra (d) Mantreśa (e) Mantramahesa 

(f) Śiva Māṇa is without 

object. 

(a) Vijñānākala (b) Mantra (c) Mantreśa (d) Mantramahesa 

(e) Śiva pramāṇa is about : 

to disappear (a) Mantra 

(b) Mantresa (c) Mantramahesa 

(d) Śiva Suddhavidyā (a) Mantreśa 

(b) Mantramahesa 

(c) Śiva Awakened 

(a) Mantramahesa Suddhavidyā (b) śiva 

Svarūpa = 1 

4+4+1=9 

(v) Mantra Svarūpa = 1 3+3+1=7 (vi) Mantresa Svarūpa = 1 2+2+1=5 (vii) Mantramahesa Svarūpa = 1 1+1+1=3 (viii) śiva 

Iccha 

(a) Śiva (b) śakti 

Svarūpa = Svātantrya 

It has been stated before that the universe is characterized by the three: nara, śakti, and śiva. The aspect known as svarūpa is the sentient object in which objectivity is predominant and where the subjectivity of consciousness is totally absent. śiva is of the characteristic of pure consciousness; He is the supreme Subject (parāpramātā). His śakti, which shines as icchā, jñāna, and kriyā, manifests herself as six knowing subjects (pramātās). Of the six, the first three, mantramaheśvara, mantreśvara, and man 

26 TANTRASĀRA 

tra, do not have any objects, so therefore are known as pure sub jects (śuddha grahaka), but vijñānākala, pralayakala, and sakala are considered as impure subjects. 

The author shows, as an example, how the earth principle (prthvi tattva) shines in relation to pramātā and prameyas. The light that shines nondifferently from the Earth (dhara) is śiva. He supports his view by quoting the śruti Dharâmantramaheśvara: being impelled by the will of śiva leads to dharāmantreśa for bestowing siddhis on those who are desirous of it, and who are connected with dharā. Mantras are the vācakas of the super intending. deities of different bhuvanas under prthivi tattva, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the non-Saiva.doc trines. He remains as pralayākala knowing subject abiding in the earth principle (dharapralayakevali) and will have his egoism abide in dharā.. 

Then, the author shows how all the tattvas abide as prāṇa śakti, related to the knowing subject (pramātā). One single prāṇa, con sisting of sixteen tuṭis, extends until the emergence of the (vedya), the thing to be known. Among the sixteen tuṭis, the first is the undifferentiated one, the second is the one that manifests the gra haka, the last tuṭi is inseparable from the object, and the one pre ceding the last has the form of a fully manifest grahaka. Thus, twelve tuṭis out of sixteen are divided broadly into two divisions. The first six are of the nature of nirvikalpaka and the next six are the characteristic of parāparā, from where vikalpa begins to rise. 

All the subjects from mantramaheśvara down to sakala shine along the twelve tuṭis, two for each subject, while the first tuti, it should be remembered, is the location for śakti. 

The fifteen aspects with their varied distinctions are observed in two tuṭis each. Just as in the cognition of a jar, the character istics of the fifteen aspects can be watched, in the same way, this is observed in the vital energy when it is engaged in grasping any object. It has been hinted earlier that when a knowing subject, such as a sakala, does not participate as a subject-that is, when it is taken as a svarūpa-the aspect of fifteen becomes thirteen. 

INTRODUCTION 27 

. 

Thus, the number of aspects diminishes gradually by twos. Then finally, as distinction disappears, the number of tuṭis diminishes. At last, the yogin is able to attain absorption in śiva. Here, the time unit consists of two tuṭis-the first tuti is considered as being full, and the other has the character of śiva-śakti. It has been stated in the Tantrāloka that one who is able to absorb oneself in the second tuṭi is sure to attain the power of omniscience. 

Now the author explains the nature of states known as waking, dreaming, deep sleep, the fourth (turya), and beyond the fourth (turyātīta). All subjects, along with their śaktis, are knowers of the objects of all the tattvas. These states are the manifestations of consciousness conditioned by knowables (prameyas)The prameya state is said to be the chief characteristic of the waking state (jāgrat), otherwise known as (addhistheya), the locus. . 

In the Mālinīvijaya it is known as pindastha, for the yogin, taking his stand on dharā and others as the base, is able to iden tify himself with them. But to the jñānin who is well advanced in meditation, it is known as sarvatobhadra, for to him, the jāgrat state is one which fully pervades the objects of experience. Tech nically, the waking state is the object of experience (prameya) or adhiṣtheya, the base, while the dreaming state (svāpna) is known as pramāṇa or adhisthana, and adhiṣthātā or the subject is the pramātā in deep sleep (sușupti). 

All the states have subdivisions of their own: (1) jāgrat-jāgrat, jāgrat-svapna, jāgrat-suṣupti, and jāgrat-turya; (2) svapna-jāgrat, svapna-svapna, svapna-sușupti, and svapna-turya; and (3) sus upti-jāgrat, suṣupti-svapna, sușupti-sușupti, and suṣupti-turya. 

Jāgrat is known to have four portions. The object that is expe rienced is abuddha, insentient, and the instrument of experience is called buddha; right knowledge, born from instrumentality, is known as prabuddha and suprabuddha. Of these two, prabuddha is of the nature of buddhi, while suprabuddha is free from impuri ties of the object of experience and therefore is of the character istic of resting in the self. This chart may be of some help for the understanding of the scheme: 

28 TANTRASĀRA 

1 

3 

Prameya Jagrat Pindastha Sarvatobhadra 

2 Pramāna Svapna Padastha Vyapti 

Pramātā Sușupti Rūpastha Mahāvyāpti 

Pramiti Turya Rūpātīta Pracaya 

T U R Υ Α Τ Ι Τ Α М А Н А Р В А С А Т А 

Piṇdastha may be explained as that which abides in the body. The abode of all paths (adhvas) is the vital energy (praṇa) and intention/thought (saṁkalpa). Everything lies in the vital energy and saṇkalpa, hence it is known as abiding there, and therefore it is also known as padastha. Rupayati is the one that gives form to the respective objects, and then withdraws them into the Self, which is none other than the atman. The Self, where they abide, is identical with the object. This identification and merger is known as rūpastha, but the form which is beyond all these is called rūpātīta. To the jñānin, svapna, whose nature is vikalpika, is con sidered to be vyāpti, for his jñāna is then free from external con ditions, and he is the active agent in changing and arranging the order of his thoughts. In the state of deep sleep, the jñānin feels freedom from limitations, therefore, it is considered as mahāv yapti. The jñānin in the turya state sees the universe collected together like an amalaka fruit in the palm of his hand; therefore, the name is pracaya. 

Jāgrat is the state which a sakala knowing subject enjoys, while svapna is enjoyed by a pralayakala, and suṣupti by a vijñā nākala subject. Mantra and mantramaheśvara subjects have their abode in the turya level, but in the turyātīta state, all beings, whether they are prameyas or pramātās, become one with śiva śakti and shine nondifferently with it. 

The fifteen aspects mentioned above are also observed in five states known as jāgrat, etc., thus: 

INTRODUCTION 29 

(1) 

From dhara to praksti 

(a) Svarūpa-Sakala-śakti (b) Pralayākala (c) Vijñānākala (d) Mantra and others (e) Śiva-śakti 

Jāgrat svapna suṣupti 

turya turyatita 

From Purusa 

to Māyā 

(a) Sakala 

(b) Prālyakala: :(c) Vijñānākala. 

(d) Mantra and others (e) śiva-śakti 

Jāgrat svapna suṣupti turya turyātīta 

(3) 

Māyā 

Jāgrat svapna suṣupti 

(a) Pralayakala (b) Vijñānākala (c) Mantra (d) Mantreśvara 

Mantramahesvara (e) Śiva-Śakti 

turya turyātīta 

(4) 

Above Māyā 

(a) Vijñānākala (b) Mantra (c) Mantraśvara (d) Mantramaheśvara (e) Śiva-Śakti 

Jāgrat svapna suṣupti turya turyātīta 

(5) 

Suddhavidyā 

(a) Mantra (b) Mantreśvara (c) Mantramahesvara (d) śakti (e) śiva 

Jāgrat svapna sușupti turya turyātīta30 TANTRASĀRA 

(6) 

Īsvara 

(a) Mantresa (b) Mantramaheśaśakti (c) Mantreśa (d) śakti (e) śiva 

Jāgrat svapna suṣupti turya turiyātīta 

(7) 

Sadaśiva 

(a) Mantramaheśvara (b) Kriyāśakti (c) Jñānaśaktis (d) Icchāśakti (e). śiva 

Jāgrat svapna suṣupti turya 

(8) 

Undifferentiated 

stage 

(a) kriyā (b) Jñana (c) Iccha (d) Ananda 

Jāgrat svapna suṣupti turya turyātīta 

(e) Cit 

### 10
Chapter Ten begins with a description of the general features of the subtle units constituting the manifested universe called kalās. Abhinavagupta defines a tattva as that which threads through all the worlds (bhuvanas), and kalā is that which invariably abides in the group of tattvas. 

The number of kalās are four, i.e., nivetti, pratisthā, vidyā, and śāntā. The four andas: pārthiva, prākrta, māyīya, and sāktā are made of these kalās. 

Nivrtti kalā operates in the earth principle (prthivi tattva), pratisthā from the water principle (jala) to prakrti, vidyā kalā from above praksti to māyā, and from above māyā, sāktā operates. śiva is considered to be beyond the kalās, for He is niskala; how 

INTRODUCTION 31 

ever, for the purpose of meditation, He is said to possess a kalā named śāntātitā. The sphere or egg (anda) is a kind of covering which exists up to śakti, and though the bhuvanas exist under the śiva tattva, they are said to be of the form of the void and there fore do not serve as a covering. 

### 11
This chapter discusses śaktipāta, but before giving a detailed account of it, the text deals with issues concerning the occurrence of the descent of grace in a particular individual. This has been dealt with in detail in our translation of the text and the additional: notes. The author presents and critiques three standard views regarding śaktipāta: (1) bondage, or saṁsāra, has ignorance as its root. When the rise of right knowledge occurs, the descent of grace also comes into being. This view has been refuted by the author. (2) Next, the view known as karmasāmya, that is, the bal ance of two opposing actions, is summarized. According to this theory, when karmasāmya occurs, śaktipāta is sure to take place. The author does not accept this view either. (3) The third view considers the ripening of mala (mala paripaka) as the cause of Śaktipāta, which is also rejected by the author. 

According to Abhinavagupta, these views may be acceptable to the followers of dualist philosophies, but according to the non dual system known as Parameśvarādvayavāda (known to modern scholarship as Kashmir Saivism), they are not tenable. According to this system, the Great Lord, in the course of His play, veils His true nature and assumes a limited nature. When the concealment of His pure nature disappears, the limited self becomes the recipi ent of śaktipāta and is able to attain the proximity of svarūpa, the true form of the Lord, either by following a sequence or by attaining proximity to the Lord without sequence. The Great Lord (Mahesvara) is in essence free, and the causal agent of śaktipāta, for which he does not depend on anything or anyone. The person who is eager to have worldly and otherworldly enjoyment (bhoga) 

32 TANTRASĀRA 

can also attain śaktipāta, but for the bhoga to be manifested, some actions must be performed. Likewise, the person who has the desire for both bhoga and mokṣa is also required to perform cer tain acts in order to attain them. 

It has been stated in the Tantrāloka that śaktipāta is, in essence, the descent of the highest light on the limited soul. It is free from all limitations and is of the characteristic of pure con sciousness. However, śaktipāta of a slightly lower nature, though shining with all the fullness of consciousness, is conditioned with the limitations of bhoga. 

It should be remembered in this context that śaktipāta is really the nature of the icchā or will of the Lord. It is He.who, by His freedom of will, veils Himself and manifests all subjects and objects as limited entities. Due to His activity of conceal ment, known as tirodhāna, the objects to be enjoyed shine before the view of the limited subjects. Thus, He willfully and playfully binds Himself, then removes these bonds, and finally shines in the fullness of jñāna and kriyā. His play of freedom is such that, though He assumes limited forms in an outward journey of con cealing Himself by manifesting and sustaining the universe, He makes a return journey to Himself through the descent of grace and revelation of Himself to Himself, ultimately shining in His pristine pure nature. 

Grace is said to be of two types: the higher, that is, the more pure and potent form, is called para; and the less potent form is apara. The para form of śaktipāta is bestowed only by the Lord Himself, but the apara kind of grace is bestowed by the super intending lords of the domain over which they have control. The form of śakti pāta bestowed by them does not lead the soul to attain śiva-hood, hence it is inferior to the one which flows from the Lord Himself. This apara grace is further divided into manda, less keen, and tivra, exceedingly keen. When apara śaktipāta is manda, it gives birth to right judgment in the soul, upon which the ability to distinguish between prakrti and puruṣa occurs. The result of this type of discrimination is that the soul does not abide 

INTRODUCTION 33 

in the worlds below praksti. When the descent is exceedingly keen (tivra), however, the soul by its merit is able to discriminate his own being from kalā tattva, and as a result becomes one of the Vijñānākala souls. He even arises to the level of mantra when the Lord wills it so. 

After śaktipāta, the author explains the nature of concealment (tirobhāvaa) as one of the five functions (pañcakrtya) of the Lord. Tirobhāva is of two types: niyati krama, when the Lord is seen as the one who ordains the law and the one who bestows the fruits of action in accordance with the merit and demerit of the soul. Here, He takes recourse to niyati, and therefore the functions of creation, maintenance, and dissolution flow from Him. But above māyānda, that is, at the level of śakti, which is beyond the sphere of karma, there continues creation of immense nature. This cre ation is known as mahāsr̥ṣṭi. Similarly, the pralaya of greater nature, that is, the highest form of dissolution, is also performed at this stage. Creation and dissolution of this nature are performed by the Lord without taking recourse to niyati, but those which are performed from the level of māyā downward are accomplished by his taking recourse to niyati. Therefore, at that stage, though He is, in essence, always prabuddha, the enlightened one, he behaves in the worldly level as an unenlightened one. 

### 12

In this chapter, the author presents and substantiates the rea sons for the performance of initiations (diksā). In addressing the question of the necessity of dikṣā, the author states that initia tion alone is the means that leads the soul to enjoyment (bhoga) and finally helps one to attain liberation. Primarily, dikṣā sanc tifies the soul and produces in it the competency for receiving knowledge (jñāna), yoga, etc., for without obtaining dikṣā fol lowing the course of Saiva Yoga would not be possible. Therefore dikṣā is considered to be the preliminary step in the progression from saṁskāra, to the proper practice of yoga, to perfection in 

34 TANTRASĀRA 

yoga, and finally to liberation; or, to put it another way: initiation, saṁskāra, perfection in mantra, worldly and otherworldly enjoy ment (bhoga), and finally, liberation. 

It should be remembered that the highest kind of knowledge is obtained from the holy texts (sāstra). One who is uninitiated is not considered to be the right person to receive instruction in the śāstras, therefore, dīksā is essential. On the other hand, those who have received the highest kind of grace, and thus earned compe tence, do not require any formal dikṣā, for their innate knowledge serves as dīksā for them. To those who are unable to follow the path of knowledge, however, the easier path is recommended; it is predominantly of a ritualistic nature. 

Snāna, bathing, is the preliminary step to dikṣā. Generally, bathing cleanses impurities of the body, but esoterically it helps one to become absorbed into Parameśvara. Ordinarily, bathing is performed with water, according to this system it is a little bit dif ferent: one who goes to take a bath should think of the presence of śiva in his eight forms. By uttering a mantra one should perform one's bath with the eight prescribed materials. Bathing is of two types, external and internal. The former is done by earth, water, the sacred ashes, etc., but the internal one is performed by one's concentration in various locations of the body. The object with which one performs one's bath is charged with a mantra and thus helps the body to become steady in reality, refreshes the body, and cleanses it of impurities. 

### 13
Here the author explains the necessity of and reasons for the ritual procedures that are to be performed on hilltops, river banks, and other holy spots. Though those places are considered to be auspi cious, they are really external, and thus of little help for attaining siddhis, in contrast to the internal seats (pithas), which are much more useful, because they concentrate the vital energy in differ ent locations in the body, and through this one is able to attain 

INTRODUCTION 35 

liberation. Just as there are many sacred places existing externally, in the same way, there are many sacred places located inside the human body, and are divided into groups known as pītha, upapi tha, sandohaka, kṣetra, and upakṣetra. The group of pithas con sists of three sacred locations: kāmarūpa, pūrṇagiri, and uddi yana. The kāmarūpa pitha is of the form of iccha; the other two are of the nature of nāda and bindu, respectively, and have their locations at the right and left side of the body. The following chart shows further details: 

(b) Upapīṭhas are three . 

1. Devikoṭṭa: śākta 2. Ujjayini: Bindu 

3. Kulagiri: Výāpini (c) Sandohaka are also three 

1. Pundravardhana: Lālana 2. Vārendra: Vaindava 

3. Ekāmra: Vyāpti (d) Kșetra are the petals of the heart lotus 

1. Prayāga 2. Varanā 3. Attahāsa 4. Jayantikā 

5. Vārāṇasi 6. Kālinga 7. Kulūtā 8. Lāhulā (e) Upakṣetra: the eight tips of the lotus 

1. Viraja 2. Erudikā 3. Hālā 4. Elāpūh 

5. Kșīrikā 6. Puri 7. Māyāpuri 8. Marudesa (f) Upasandohaka are the junctures of the eight petals of the 

heart lotus with the center 

1. Jālandhara 2. Naipāla 3. Kaśmīrā 4. Gargikā 5. Haraḥ 6. Mlecchadigdvāravrtti 7. Kuruksetra 8. Khetaka 

Although outer sacred places are of no help in attaining release, they are suitable places for worship, because deities who are well versed in jñāna and yoga are born there and have sanctified the place. Moreover, by staying in those places, devoted people may become recipients of jñāna and yoga; therefore, aspirants make pilgrimages to sacred places. The author further clarifies that such places are to be selected as the setting for rituals as they bestow satisfaction to the heart lotus. 

36 TANTRASĀRA 

For the purpose of worship, one should attain the state of a pure heart and stand outside the ritual space and perform nyāsa with either the matļkā or malini orders of the Sanskrit alphabet, or both. 

The nyāsa of mātṣkā is performed in the following way: forehead - a 

right shoulder- k mouth - ā eyes 

- ili 

forearm 

hand 

ears 

u/ū 

finger 

nails nostrils s/ļī. . left shoulder cheeks' .. .!/l. 

left arm teeth . elai hand 

fingers 

nails lip upper - : 

right hip lip lower - 

thigh top of 

the head - 

foot tip of the 

tongue - 

fingers 

nails left hip 

right and left thigh 

arm pit foot 

back finger 

belly nails 

heart skin 

bones nails meat 

sukra majja 

prāṇakoṣa The nyasa of mālini is: nprīl ļī th c dh i ṇu ū b k kh g gh n i a v bh y d dh ţh jh 

n jr tp ch 1 a s ahh o ks m < am t e ai ở au d ph. 

fat 

INTRODUCTION 37 

Performing nyasa with the mālini order is quite different from mātrkā nyāsa. Nyāsa is performed first in the fingers, which is followed by nyāsa in the body. Mālini and mātskā both are śiva and śakti by nature. The supreme form of śiva in this tradition is Bhairava; the mass of phonemes (sabdarāśi) is contained indivis ibly and inseparably within Himself. This sabdarāśi is also śakti Herself, because it is she who, like a mother, gives birth to her creation in its differentiated forms; therefore, she is called mātrkā, the mother. Mālini is put on by the Rudras like a mala, or gar land, by which they bestow enjoyment and liberation. In deriving the word mala, the author says that the phoneme "ma" represents saṁhara; that is, withdrawal. The phoneme “ra” means granting, and since "ra" and "la” are identical, “la” means to receive. 

Nyāsa should be performed in order to bring into predomi nance the śākta body in the worshipper. It is done in the sacrifi cial vessel (arghapatra). The teacher (ācārya) then purifies all the articles of worship with a few drops of water from the arghapatra. After worshipping the external deities outside the door, the ācārya enters within and watches the interior with the vision of the Lord. If the disciple is desirous of release, the ācārya sits facing north; if otherwise, he sits facing east. The highest light of conscious ness is the middle, from which the other directions proceed. Just as the Lord manifests the respective distinctions of directions, so does the sun. It is the sun which represents the Lord's jñāna śakti. While deciding directions, one should think of the unity of the three-namely, the self, the sun, and the Lord-as coalesced into one. It is followed by the ritual practice of burning of the physical and the subtle bodies, and by this relinquishing I-consciousness in the physical body. However, it should be pointed out that the physical body is not actually burned; rather, offerings represent ing the body, etc. are consigned to the fire. Afterwards, whatever remain as ashes are regarded as nothing but the residual traces of the former bodies. 

Then, the acārya should remain steady in the state of pure consciousness. It is like a tranquil sea from where the creative 

38 TANTRASĀRA 

consciousness (sasvit) begins to break into waves. The first cre ative impulse of consciousness causes the pure body to rise. This newly born body is characterized by the unlimited power of Bhai rava. This body is really the supreme form (para mūrti) of the Lord and is characterized by the mantra "om ham." Other nyāsas are performed so that all the tattvas may rise there. All the śaktis associated with nine principles are to be worshipped, after which the sixfold nyāsa follows. 

There are five states, namely, waking (jāgrat), dream (svapna), deep sleep (suṣupti), the fourth (turya), and beyond the fourth (turiyātīta); but anuttara is beyond them all. This is called the state or condition of one's own nature (svabhāvadasā). These states have Brahma, .Viṣṇu, Rudra, īśvara, Sadaśiva, and śiva as their lords, and are thus are associated with the real cause of thirty-six categories. Because of this, when nyāsa is performed in the body, the entire universe becomes one with the real cause of the tattvas, from which pure creation begins to manifest. Mūrti nyasa and other practices are performed only for the purpose of attaining nonduality. 

It may be asked: Is there any use of further nyāsa after the burning of the body once one has attained steadiness in tranquil śiva? To answer this question, the author states that śiva is not a static reality that is entirely separate, transcendent, and excluded from all the other tattvas. Rather, śiva is the great light of con sciousness which shines in multifarious forms. 

After consecrating the body, the worshipper then performs sulabja nyāsa in the vital energy. One should think of earth, water, fire, and wind elements as located above, and supporting the energy which is situated four digits below the navel. One digit each is occupied by earth and the others. The bulb (kanda) is supposed to be like a boat that helps one cross the ocean. The air abides there, and the sky is lying within it. Then the worshipper thinks of the staff named ananta going up to lambikā, the aper ture below the palate (tālurandhra). It contains all the tanmātras, subtle elements, etc. Above it is the knot of māyā, where four legs 

INTRODUCTION 39 

of the simhāsana, in the form of a lion, stand. Dharma, jñāna, vairagya, and aiśvarya assume these forms, whereas adharma, ajñāna, avairagya, and anaiśvarya are the joining planks. They occupy southeast, southwest, northwest, and northeast, respec tively; adharma and others occupy the east, south, west, and north. 

Above māya and below the trident, the simhasana is covered with two sheets of cloth: the lower one represents māyā for veil ing the real nature of manifestation, and the upper one is for the purpose of covering māyā itself. The worshipper then meditates on the vidyā lotus; that is, śuddhavidyā as a white lotus. Its pet als are occupied by the śaktis known as vāmā and others, with Brahma, Visnu, and Rudra representing creation, maintenance, and dissolution. Object of knowledge (meya), knowledge (māṇa), and subject (matr) are superintending, seated on three mandalas, one above the other, from lambikā onward. īśvara is located above Rudra, and further above, Sadāśiva is lying, like a corpse, but he is ever awake and is of the nature of reflecting nāda, primal sound. Three lotuses have grown from his navel, consisting of a three pronged trident, piercing three apertures of His head; the trident is of the nature of nadanta and made luminous by the three śaktis, i.e., śakti, vyāpini, and samanā. Above them is the aunmanasa, where one should meditate on the supreme Goddess as having been made of all the tattvas as her seat. In the process of worship, one offers the entire universe to her. Meditation (dhyāna), mantra rep etition (japa), etc., are to be performed internally. 

This is followed by external rituals. If the disciple desires ini tiation, he is given consecratory rites (adhivāsana). This is per formed in order to make him worthy to receive various saṇskāras, and to cause the deity to become intent on him. 

Then the author explains in detail how adhivāsana is performed. It is to be noted here that both guru and the disciple pass the night in the place of adhivāsana. If the disciple sees any inauspicious dream, he reports it to the teacher the next morning. The teacher then allays the inauspicious elements by performing certain rituals. 

Then, the teacher worships the Lord. When this is complete,40 TANTRASĀRA 

the teacher enters inside the body of the disciple by the outlet of the prāṇa in order to come in contact with the six presiding dei ties located in the six centers. Then, meditating on the forty-eight samskāras, rites are performed in the body of the "newly born child"; that is, the disciple, through contact with Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Isvara. Sadāśiva, and śiva, located in the hrdaya, kantha, tālu, ghrumadhya, lalata, and brahmarandhra, respectively. The eight rites of purification are meditated upon differently in each of the six centers. Thus the number becomes complete, and as a result the disciple becomes twice born (dvīja). Then, causing the prāṇa of the disciple to rest in the respective places for a while, the teacher comes out and gives him the mantra along with flow- · ers. Then he tells him the code of conduct (samaya) which he should follow as long as he lives. 

### 14
This chapter describes the procedure of initiation called putraka. On the third day after anointment, a mandala or diagram con sisting of three tridents with a lotus on each prong is drawn on the ground. All the rituals described in this chapter are to be performed in relation to it. Those groups of deities called the "external retinues" and the "deities at the door" are worshipped outside. Then, in front of the mandala, moving from northeast to southeast, Ganesa, one's teacher (guru), the teacher's teacher (paramagurus), the lineage of previous teachers, the yoginis, the Goddess of Speech (Vāgiśvarī), and kṣetrapalas are worshipped. After receiving their permission, the teacher worships the nine paths (adhvas) in the tridents. On the middle prong of the middle most trident, the Goddess Srīparā and Bhairava are worshipped; the Goddess Śrīāparā is worshipped on the left, and the Goddess Śrīparāparā on the right. On the trident to the right, Srīparāparā is placed in the middle prong, while on the trident to the left Sriāparā is placed in the middle. Bhagavati is the supreme Goddess, and because of her presence everywhere, all activities become perfect, 

INTRODUCTION 41 

and therefore all the rituals should be performed in the middle most prong of the middle trident. 

Then, the teacher meditates on the unification of the jar (kumbha), kalaśa, mandala, agni, and the self as one. He cog nizes the all-pervading aham as being present everywhere through the method known as mantranādi prayoga. 

He sees to it that all the articles for the ritual are not collected in a miserly way. If the person is poor, on the other hand, mahā mandala yāga is not recommended. 

Then, the author describes animal sacrifice (pasu homa). When it is complete, the teacher brings the disciple in front of him. and performs all the adhvanyāsas in his body, and purifies his inauspicious deeds, provided he is desirous of bhoga. In the case of the disciple who desires mokṣa, both his auspicious and inaus. picious deeds should be purified. Then, the teacher, reflecting on the main mantra, purifies all the adhvas abiding in the disciple's body, meditating on the nondual nature of śiva. 

After attaining oneness of consciousness, the teacher abides in the body of the disciple from his toes to the top of his head, and having absorbed the consciousness of the disciple's body, the teacher rests, along with the disciple, in the ocean of bliss, which is in essence the wealth of freedom. The teacher merges along with him into the Lord, resplendent with icchā, jñāna, and kriyā. Thus, the disciple becomes non-different from the Lord. If the disciple is desirous of bhoga, the teacher unites him with that par ticular principle. Finally, the teacher bestows on him a pure body for performing deeds in mundane life. 

### 15
This chapter describes the initiation given to a dying person. The recipient of such a dikṣā is a person who has been suffering from an incurable disease. The teacher, after making nyāsa of all the adhvas in him and purifying them one after the other, performs a nyāsa called marmakartani, by which he severs all the delicate 

42 TANTRASĀRA 

joints and brings his consciousness to brahmarandhra. For the purpose of unification (yojana), he then offers the final oblation into the fire. Thus, the disciple becomes one with Parāmaśiva. 

### 16
In this chapter, the author describes the method of initiation that is given to those who are dead and who are not present during the procedure. For the purpose of bestowing it on the departed soul, the teacher brings nearby a device known as mahājāla prayoga, the application of a large net. To the person who is absent but not dead, this procedure is not followed.. 

### 17
This chapter gives the procedure known as lingoddhāra; it simply means “rescuing a person from a fallen state." It is performed for one who has gone away from the right track by receiving initia tion from persons belonging to other systems, such as Vaisnava, Bauddha, and other lower Saiva schools. However, the teacher will grant this type of initiation only when he becomes convinced that Śaktipāta has definitely occurred in a prospective disciple. 

According to the author, the Trika is the superior system, for all the other śāstras, as preached by Kapila and others, lead the seeker to attain release from prakrti, but they do not help him attain release from māyā. On the other hand, Saivāgamas, as expounded by the Trika, lead everybody to the ultimate immediately. 

### 18
In this chapter the method of abhiseka is described. Abhiseka is given both to putraka and acārya types of disciples, provided they have received the sabīja form of initiation. The term sabīja means “with seed," but it really signifies that this form of initiation is given to those who are competent enough to follow certain strict rules of conduct during their lifetime. On the other hand, the nir bīja form of initiation is given to old and decrepit persons who are less assiduous and therefore unable to follow strict codes of con duct as enjoined by the holy text. 

Abhiseka is restrictive in the sense that not everybody is con sidered competent enough to receive it. In particular, acāryābhi ṣeka is given to those who, after receiving initiation, have attained proficiency in āgamic knowledge; those who have restraint over their body, mind, and speech; those who follow the duties as 

enjoined by the scripture; those who have become proficient in :: unification of the adhvas in their respective order (adhvānusan 

dhāna); those who have gained perfection-in the highest knowl edge by listening to it from their teacher; and those who continue mental exertion for retaining it, followed by meditative thought (śruta, cinta, and bhāvanā) terminating in identity with śiva. The author categorically states that even after receiving abhiṣeka, only one who has really attained perfection in the highest knowledge is worthy of bestowing grace to others. 

### 19

The funeral sacrifice is the final rite for every human being. Ini tiation is given during that period only to a person who, though he belonged to the highest Saiva order, on account of some unknown factor lost the tradition and expired without performing the rites of atonement before death. Such a person is given initiation when his body is placed on the funeral pyre. 

For the purpose of rescuing the deceased, all the rituals are performed upon the body. The final offering into the fire (pūr nāhuti) is performed by burning the body. In order to convince ignorant people, the person who initiates causes the dead body to shake. He does this by means of kriyā, jñāna, and yoga, though it is not necessary for the release of the soul. 

If the deceased person cannot be given initiation during the burning of his corpse, he may be given initiation during his srād 

44 TANTRASĀRA 

dha rite. The teacher takes a ball of rice in his hand and meditates on it as the form of the energizing śakti, and by doing so, the soul of the dead person is possessed. This food is considered to be the portion of animal-like quality of the soul and is really the thing to be enjoyed. When both the bhogya and bhogya śakti become uni fied by the meditation of the acārya, it becomes fit to be offered to the supreme enjoyer, the Lord. Thus, leaving the animalistic portion behind, which is the essence of the bhogya, the bhogya śakti, along with the self, is offered to the supreme bhoktā, the Lord. In this way, the soul becomes identical with Him. It should be remembered that the final procedure is preceded by the homa sacrifice and other rituals. 

· In this chapter, the author raises a relevant question: whether for the knower of reality (tattva jñānin), rituals such as sraddha and others are necessary or not. He answers saying that when, by the light of true knowledge, darkness has been totally removed from the enlightened one, there is no need of a final ritual like antyesti śrāddha, etc. But, for the people who had been closely associated with the departed one, the day of his unification with the Supreme is observed as a day of parva, the day which causes fullness of consciousness in him. 

### 20

The present section discusses the disciple's obligations, known as sesavartana, the duties that should be carried out until the end of his life. These duties are of three kinds: obligatory (nitya), occa sional (naimittika), and kāmya, those performed for the fulfill ment of some desire. 

The nitya procedure is described in the following way: One should get up early in the morning and call to mind one's desired deity first. After completing his essential activities, like wash ing, etc., and cleansing himself, he should take his seat facing north. He then purifies his body, the place where he sits, and his mind. Then he performs nyāsa upon the appropriate places with 

INTRODUCTION 45 

the mantra, followed by displaying an appropriate mudrā. Then he performs dhyāna in two ways: first, abiding in duality, and then in a mixed dual-nondual way. Next, mental worship of the deity is performed in the body, then in prāṇa, in the intellect, and finally in the void (vyoma). This is followed by japa, and finally the completed sequence of worship is offered to the deity. All this is to be performed every day, in every sandhya, for the purpose of achieving identification with the deity. Four sandhyas have been mentioned in Chapter Six. According to the author, through medi tation during sandhya, endless absorption (anantatanmayi bhāva) in the Supreme comes about, which.in turn gives birth to a lasting state. 

The worshipper should worship his deity in the altar (sthan dila). He should view it as a clear sky with the characteristics of consciousness, where all the deities are shining as reflected therein. Viewing bare open ground really signifies invocation (āvāhana). This practice ensures that the disciple identifies with the desired deity and the highest mantra. 

Invocation of the all-pervading Lord is not possible; only desire (vāsanā) for the Lord is invoked and drawn within, since the great Lord can neither be invoked or withdrawn. 

The person who is totally absorbed in the highest mantra in the way stated above becomes free from the stains of animal proclivi ties and is finally able to put an end to all bonds by the blow of bhakti. After that, whatever remains is the most agreeable object for the worshipper. 

Then, the author describes the activities related to the parvas, which are performed occasionally by the disciple. 

### 21
This chapter presents the authority of agamas. In the Tantrāloka, āgama has been defined as a well-known fact of old, as prasid dhi. It also emphasizes the point that even agreement and contra riety (anvaya and vyatireka), which are the very life of inference, 

46 TANTRASĀRA 

also depend on prasiddhi. Similarly, perception looks for prasid dhi as its support; for without its help, which is thought to be of the nature of self-reflection (svātmavimarsātmika prasiddhi), it would not be possible to consider anything as acceptable or avoid able. Therefore, prasiddhi lies at the root of every worldly transac tion. The great Lord, who is all-perfect, with the characteristic of I-consciousness, and who is omniscient, is the source of all pra siddhis. He, the Lord, is adorned with a multitude of prasiddhis with the form of enjoyment (bhoga) and release (apavarga). 

The entire universe is of the nature of consciousness, which is nothing but reflective nature, and that again is, in essence, sound. 

• The reflection (vimarśanam) of objects contained by the universe, and of the diverse relations of past deeds and their results, is known as holy texts (sāstra). All the sāstras are not really differ ent from the nature of Parameśvara. The holy texts have a single aim; yet, because of the limiting condition of niyati, people are : strongly attached to only a portion of them. Therefore, some fol 

low the dual system and others are attached to the nondual. In the end, the author concludes that a particular agama should be resorted to only after it has been shown to produce excellent results. 

### 22
This last chapter explains the nature of Kulācara. It should be noted at the outset that this form of worship is not meant for every body, but is only for those who are well advanced, and in whom the inclination for performing such rituals has grown strong; only because of this are they entitled to perform this worship of the divine according to this method.+++(5)+++ 

When a person becomes free from determination (vikalpa) and is able to attain steadiness in the indeterminate state (nirvikalpa), only then is one entitled to worship according to kulakrama, for it is stated in the Tantrāloka that if, during the performance of this ritual, one thinks of the object of worship as different from himself, he fails to attain either siddhi or mukti. One who has plunged into the secret of this ritual and follows its course is really endowed with the highest knowledge. Therefore, Jayaratha writes in his commentary on Tantrāloka 29:102 that those great souls who are really free from vikalpas take up this course, as prescribed by the Kula system. Particularly, they follow the course only to see if their mind, in the presence of allurements, is truly steady in pure consciousness (samvidadvaite) or not.+++(5)+++ For this reason, they do not think it immoral to practice in the company of female partners (duti). 

Kula ritual is performed in six different ways, namely: (1) externally; (2) in śakti, (3) in one's own body, (4) in the unity of both male and female, (5) in the vital energy, and (6) in consciousness. The worshippers are of two kinds: those who desire enjoyment (siddhis) and those desirous of liberation (mukti). Those desirous of siddhis should perform kulayāga according to the methods listed as second, fourth, and fifth, while those who desire liberation should perform the sixth. 

The author gives a short description of each of the methods in a cryptic way. In the past, the tradition was to be handed down orally, only to those qualified; therefore, many of the matters are not very clear to us. Therefore, we prefer to say little about this secret cult. 

H. N. Chakravarty 


