+++
title = "01 Mantra and Primal Sound"

+++

## The Universal Tradition of Sacred Sound

All over the world we find traditions of special words of power, magical phrases or secret codes that can unlock the great mysteries of life otherwise unapproachable to the human mind. Such traditions occur in religion, occult sciences, mysticism, shamanism, and almost every known spiritual path. Poetry, literature and philosophy worldwide similarly recognize the power of the word, sound or prime concept to influence and move us at a very deep level. While accessing the cosmic powers may not be as simple as repeating a phrase like ‘open sesame’, there are key sounds and words that can dramatically reveal new vistas of insight and energy within us.

While the Yoga practitioners of India have developed sacred sound into an extensive science of mantra as discussed in detail in the following chapters, it is important to note that the tradition of the transformative power of ‘the Word’ is universal. What makes the yogic approach so important and compelling is that it looks at the power of sound and the Word in an experiential manner as part of a sacred approach to the whole of life and consciousness.

The Judeo-Christian tradition starts with God creating the universe through the Word: “Let there be light,” and there was light. The New Testament ponders, “In the beginning was the Word.” The monastic history of Christianity includes prayer, chant and formalized words of meditation. Church services frequently include responsive chants of ‘Amen’. The Jewish Kabala has mystic syllables and explains the Hebrew alphabet in a similar way relative to cosmology as the Yoga tradition does the Sanskrit alphabet. Sufism relies on the power of oft repeated prayers and Divine names to bring life into harmony with the Spirit.

Taoism has an important tradition of healing sounds for body and mind that are used in Taoist Yoga and traditional Chinese medicine. Buddhism has its own rich tradition of mantras, particularly in the Buddhist Tantras and in Tibetan Buddhism. These are largely Sanskrit mantras and include many of the same mantras as in the Hindu Yoga tradition mentioned in this book. Shamanic healing from all over the world invokes healing powers through chant and prayer, with diseases expelled in its rituals through the use of an emphatic phrase or mantra. We find traditions of sacred sound in all ancient cultures from Egypt and Babylonia to India, China and the Americas, as the ancient world lived more closely to the magic of the Divine Word.

Many traditions teach that if you know the Name of something you can gain mastery over it. This is an expression of the occult, mystical sense of being able to create the vibration or resonance of the object to fully identify with it. It is not the outer name, such as we find in a dictionary, which grants this power but the inner Name that is a mantric vibration. There is a sound code or vibratory pattern behind the universe itself, embedded in the fabric of existence that holds the intelligence, information and energy forms through which all processes of life operate. Connecting to this universal vibration is the basis for the yogic pursuit of mantra.

Yet apart from the mysticism of mantra, there is a practical side to mantra that is also gaining wide recognition today. Mantra as a term has entered into languages worldwide. Mantra is now commonly used to indicate a key word or phrase employed by various groups or individuals to summarize their views or relate their prime focus. This practical idea of mantra fits in well with the computer age, in which complex information is passed on in concentrated data bits that connect us to wider fields of knowledge and energy. It is what we could call ‘the mantric approach of information technology’. A mantric like condensation of knowledge has become essential to modern communication and higher education. It is the ancient basis of the ‘power point’ presentation among many other such concentrated teaching devices.

The power of the Word is easily seen in our everyday lives as the words help create the environment within which we live, for good or ill. Road rage is frequently accompanied by expletives and the pent up energy behind them frequently breaks out in fights, tension and traffic accidents. Political rallies and sports competitions use key phrases and chants to create a mass energy to stimulate action and bring about victory, to get the crowd involved as it were, which can have positive or negative effects on a large scale.

The mass media world relies on key words, slogans and advertising phrases. Such short statements become the news stories in brief and can impact public opinion and sentiment globally, affecting us at subconscious and conscious levels. These concentrated sound messages are all mantras or power words of sorts. Through the science of Mantra Yoga, we can navigate our way through the influences of the dominant words reverberating around us to a higher truth, discerning the sounds that weigh down our consciousness from those that elevate it.

The reality behind these sacred or mundane uses of words of power is that words carry energy, creating and embodying the inner essence and forms of manifestations in the world. Each outer object has its own characteristic sound vibration that sustains it. Our own bodies, minds and hearts have their own characteristic sound patterns, which in turn are affected by the spectrum of sounds around us.

## Mantra Yoga, Yoga as Sound

Mantra Yoga provides us a means to understand sacred sound from the perspective of a tradition that has taken it beyond mysticism into an organized and codified spiritual science. Mantra Yoga includes a study of the qualities inherent in sound itself, through which words and meanings are either properly shaped or deformed. It shows how sounds impact the nervous system, mind and heart, and how we can modify them to improve our lives. Regardless of which background or tradition you may personally follow, the insights provided in Mantra Yoga can be of enormous value to enable you to manifest your destiny creatively, effectively and completely through understanding the power of the Word.

The ‘energetics of sound’ discussed from the standpoint of Mantra Yoga can help you understand the sounds that you are setting in motion in your own life, and what their likely impact is going to be. The methods of Mantra Yoga can help you apply mantra and sacred sound in a practical manner, just as you can use Yoga asanas or pranayama to improve your health and awareness. While most of what is taught here is placed in the context of the Yoga tradition, Ayurvedic medicine and Vedic science, these teachings have a relevance to the whole of life. Mantra Yoga can take your Yoga or meditation practice to a higher level, but it is also helpful in terms of any healing arts for body or mind, and for any literary or philosophical pursuits.

Mantra is a tool for connecting us with the spiritual wisdom and the energy of consciousness hidden in the universe as a whole. Mantra is a doorway to an awareness that exists beyond all limited bits of information or technical knowledge. Mantra summarizes an inner view of reality as a play of consciousness that can instantly comprehend the whole, grasping the totality in a single point focus of direct perception and immediate experience. The universe itself is ultimately an expression of a single mantra or vibratory sound energy.

Mantra in the yogic sense relates to the prime energies, ideas, principles or archetypes of the cosmic intelligence that directs the forces of nature and the movements of our own minds and hearts. Mantra is part of a universal language rooted in sound, image, number and symbol, reflecting a ‘cosmic thinking’ beyond the preconceptions and biases of human thought. Mantra functions according to the inner mathematics of cosmic law. It serves to link our individual intelligence with the greater intelligence that pervades all space, extending our awareness into the Infinite and Eternal. To chant a mantra at a deeper yogic level is to think with the entire universe and to access the wisdom and experience of all beings.

There are mantric sounds that can awaken the higher potentials of the brain and change the flow of energy in the nervous system. Each one of us has a unique sound pattern that sustains all that we do, and allows our energies to move and grow or stagnate and decline. Unless we learn to harmonize our inner sound vibrations, our lives will likely remain in disharmony and suffering. Mantra is the most important tool for attuning our bodies and minds to their proper resonance, which is not with the outer world, but with the Divine presence that constitutes our own deepest Self.

## Mantra and Modern Yoga

Today the interest in Yoga, which has largely been focused on asana or posture, is expanding beyond the physical back to Yoga’s core concern with consciousness. In this process a new popular usage of mantras is arising. In yogic circles, mantras may be recommended as part of inner spiritual practices or for outer personal gains and achievements. Some groups emphasize special mantras to improve prosperity, health or well-being. They claim that those who chant these will gain wealth, status or whatever they really want in life. Other groups emphasize special spiritual mantras to help induce higher states of consciousness. They maintain that those who chant their mantras will more quickly reach levels of awareness not otherwise easily accessible. Many Yoga students chant mantras, using a personal mantra given by their guru or sanctified by their lineage, or add mantras to their Yoga classes, passing them on to their students.

However, in spite of this new interest in mantra, the full science of mantra is not well understood or even appreciated. There is often a secrecy maintained around mantras in order to preserve their power, which must be respected. In addition, few people know the complete science of mantra, as this requires a practice and study of mantras on many levels, not merely repeating a few common mantras for one’s personal benefit. We find many people today chanting mantras that they don’t know or teaching mantras that they have not practiced or brought to life on an inner level. The situation is ripe for a deeper approach to mantra, so that serious students can learn how to apply mantras with discrimination, insight and a higher aspiration.

Modern Yoga emphasizes Yoga asanas which place the body into special poses through which a transformative stillness can arise. Perhaps the easiest way for us to understand mantra is as a kind of asana for the mind. Mantras provide focus, strength, plasticity and adaptability to the mind, just as asanas do for the body. Mantras exercise our mental energy and give it poise and stability, just as asanas improve our physical condition. Most importantly, mantras harmonize the mental field, drawing our consciousness into a state of stillness that is inspirational.

Just as each asana puts the body into a certain energetic posture in which higher forces can be released, so too each mantra puts the mind into a certain pose in which it can become a conduit for a higher flow of energy and grace. Each mantra like each asana has its intention, form, and means of adaptation. Much like each asana, each mantra has its signature energy that brings about a specific effect upon the mind and can be understood according to its sound, meaning and application. Unless we learn to use mantra in our Yoga practice, we may succeed in putting our body into wonderful asanas, but our mind may remain rigid, agitated or distracted. As asana is the key to the flexibility of the body, the right use of mantra is the key to the flexibility of the mind\!

In the world of Yoga today, chanting or kirtan is another important practice that is rapidly growing in popularity. Kirtan is based upon the repetition of mantric sounds, names and phrases; though not all who perform kirtan may be aware of the meanings involved. Kirtan, we could say, is mantric music and song. It sets in motion the power of mantra within us, not just as a mental pattern but as a current of deeper energy and feeling.1 If we want to know the spiritual essence of Kirtan, we need to look more deeply into the subject of mantra.

Many modern Yoga groups give importance to mantra and primal sound. The mantra *Oṁ* has become the main word and sound of Yoga. The chanting of Shanti or peace mantras is another important part of modern Yoga gatherings. The TM or Transcendental Meditation movement has for decades promoted mantra meditation and primal sound as its main technique. The Krishna movement has promoted the *Hare Kr̥ṣça *mantra as its primary means of developing devotion and higher awareness. Even the Yogic greeting, Namaste, ‘I bow to the Divine within you’, is a kind of mantra.

The great Shiva mantra – *Oṁ Namaḥ Śivāya*\! – is used by many Yoga groups, particularly those rooted in the Sivananda and Siddha Yoga traditions. Pranic mantras like *So**’**ham* and *Hamsa* \(Hong Sau\) are emphasized by groups like Self-realization Fellowship \(SRF\) or Siddha Yoga. Many Yoga Gurus initiate their students with mantras or combine mantra with the pranayama, asana or meditation approaches that they teach.

Mantras are one of the easiest of Yoga practices to perform, unlike complicated Yoga postures or strong pranayamas that many people are unable to do. There are simple mantras that any sincere student can be taught and gain much benefit from. However, mantra is also a very deep subject that can require more study and focus than outer Yoga practices working on the body and breath. Mantra connects us to the profoundest Yoga philosophies and the most powerful forms of meditation. Such a deeper use of mantras requires special training and adaptation at an individual level with a teacher trained in the tradition. As Yoga spreads and develops, the role of Mantra Yoga is bound to become more important, crucial and transformative both for the new student and for the advanced teacher.

## Traditions of Mantra Yoga

In the following chapters, we will examine the yogic science of mantra, its philosophy, energetics and rules of application, so that we can employ mantras with clarity, comprehension and greater efficacy. We will also address the issue of how to keep mantras sacred so that they can raise our consciousness in life, rather than just become another tool for our transient desires.

For this exploration, we will rely upon the great mantric traditions of India - the Vedic and the Tantric – in which the subject of mantra and sacred sound is most fully addressed. There is a profound art and science of mantra, described in a number of traditional texts, which is seldom studied today. The fact that few of these texts are available in translation, or that existing translations are often defective, contributes to this condition.

The great *Upanishads*, the prime source books of spiritual knowledge for the Hindu tradition, contain sections on mantra and primal sound, connecting back to older Vedic teachings given in cryptic mantras. The Tantric tradition explores the different mantras and the Sanskrit alphabet in great detail as divine powers. The Shabda Brahman or ‘Sound Yoga’ tradition shows how mantra and sound can lead us to the highest reality. It states, “Two forms of knowledge are to be known, the Sound Brahman \(Shabda Brahman\) and the Supreme Brahman. Becoming immersed in the Sound Brahman, one reaches the Supreme Brahman.”2

In addition, our study will bring in the work of modern mantra masters starting with the great Sanskrit poet and Raja yogi, Ganapati Muni, the chief disciple of the great sage Ramana Maharshi. We will use the insights of Ganapati’s disciple Brahmarshi Daivarata, who was an important inspiration to Maharishi Mahesh Yogi of the TM movement and his promotion of Vedic knowledge. We will note the views of Sri Aurobindo, perhaps modern India’s greatest philosopher and poet, who wrote in an English idiom but with a full understanding of older Sanskrit traditions.

However, our study of mantra will be practical as well, showing how we can use mantra to improve our lives on all levels. Mantra is a means of both enhancing awareness and of improving all our actions. The reader should be able to add mantra to their practices of asana, pranayama and meditation in a way that is rational, respectful and in harmony with the deeper teachings of the great Yogis, using mantras for physical, psychological and spiritual well-being. We need an intelligent, discerning and sacred approach to mantra, so that more people can benefit from this great tool of Yoga, without compromising its essence, power or purity.

Mantra is part of a great yogic technology for unfolding the higher powers both of our own core awareness and of the vast universe of consciousness. Through mantra we can gain access to and mastery over the forces of Nature, like the five great elements, and the very well-springs of creation itself. We can understand our own inner being through mantra and go beyond the ego and its limitations. Through mantra we can communicate with subtler regions beyond this dense physical realm and learn to ascend the ladder of the worlds to the Absolute beyond all manifestation.

## Back to Primal Sound

To approach the essence of mantra, we will focus on the foundation of mantra in ‘primal sound’ and bija mantras, the shorter single-syllable ‘seed mantras’ that are among the most powerful mantras and the easiest to pronounce. We will emphasize two types of bija mantras. The first is the letters of the Sanskrit alphabet, which are the basis of all mantras and hold the key to cosmic sound. The letters of the Sanskrit alphabet reflect the prime powers of creation through which everything in the universe is structured, down to the physical body itself.

Second, we will examine the key Shakti mantras, which are more complex sounds, like the commonly used *Oṁ* and *Hrīṁ*. Shakti mantras reflect the prime forces of the universe and can be used to direct higher energies in specific ways, including awakening the Kundalini Shakti, the inner power of higher consciousness.

We will explore the meaning and usage of both types of bija mantras relative to Yoga, Ayurveda \(Vedic medicine\), Jyotish \(Vedic astrology\), and Vastu \(Vedic architecture\), where they are crucial. Mantra therapy is probably the main therapy used in all Vedic sciences for promoting our greater well-being, inwardly and outwardly.

Along with bija mantras, the book will examine important ‘Name mantras’ to different deities. We will also mention longer mantras, verses and Sanskrit hymns like Vedic Sukta and Sanskrit Stotras, which develop the power of mantra into the realm of prayer, deep devotion and meditation.

* * *

1 This is stated with some qualification because there is also a tendency to bring into western kirtan not a sacred but a mundane entertainment that can be out of harmony with the deeper urges of Yoga.

2 Brahmabindu Upanishad 17.


