+++
title = "Dana"

+++
(“giving”) Charitable giving. This is a  
common religious practice, for it is  
believed to be a pious act that generates  
religious merit. Dana is especially prevalent at pilgrimage places and other  
sacred sites (**tirthas**), since the sacredness of these places is believed to magnify the consequences of any act,  
whether good or bad. Dana is one of the  
traditional paradigms for exchange, the  
other being **dakshina** (preceptor’s fee).  
The difference between them is that  
dakshina is a fee for services, whereas  
dana is given freely and brings one no  
tangible benefits. Aside from the intangible religious merit generated by  
dana, it is also a common way to get rid  
of any **inauspiciousness** or ill fortune,  
which is transferred to the receiver  
along with the gift. This assumption  
makes receiving dana karmically risky,  
whereas there are no such stigmas  
associated with dakshina. People who  
live solely by receiving gifts, such as  
beggars at pilgrimage sites, are thus in  
an unenviable position, since they are  
commonly described as “vessels”  
(patras) for the depositing of ill fortune. Yet this transfer of inauspiciousness is a pervasive pattern in regular  
society, and even within the family there  
are means to transfer inauspiciousness  
through well-established gift-giving patterns, particularly the **kanyadan**, or gift  
of a bride in marriage. For further information on dana and gift-giving patterns,  
see Gloria Goodwin Raheja, *The Poison*  
*in the Gift,* 1988.