+++
title = "Shivaratri"

+++
(“Night of **Shiva**”) The most important  
annual festival for devotees (**bhakta**) of  
the god Shiva, celebrated on the fourteenth day of the dark (waning) half  
of the **lunar month** of **Phalgun**  
(February–March). Worshipers of  
Shiva on this night are said to receive  
unlimited religious benefits. The observances for this festival fall into three  
general categories: fasting (**upavasa**),  
wakefulness, and **worship**. Those fasting on Shivaratri must abstain from all  
grains—which define the difference  
between a “snack” and a “meal”—but  
are free to eat all other things. During  
the night observers stay awake, preferably at a temple, relating and listening to  
Shiva’s mythic exploits, and worship  
Shiva early the next morning. Shivaratri  
is a major Indian festival, and in many  
places the readings and discourses are  
broadcast through loudspeakers, so  
that those nearby may also share the  
religious merit.  
The charter myth for this festival  
describes the power of any religious  
observances performed on this day,  
even if unknowingly. According to the  
story, a hunter lost in the woods on the  
evening of Shivaratri climbs a tree for  
safety, and spends the night. Unknown  
to him, at the base of the tree is a **linga**,  
the pillar-shaped object which is Shiva’s  
symbolic form. The hunter passes a cold  
and miserable night, and through his  
shivering shakes the tree, sending dew  
and leaves from the tree as **offerings**  
onto the linga; upon descending the tree  
he kneels to pick up an arrow he has  
dropped during the night and thus  
kneels before the linga. Despite a lifetime of bad **karma** generated by his  
livelihood as a hunter, the religious  
merit from this unknowing observance  
brought this hunter to the abode of  
Shiva on his death, and to a later rebirth  
as a king.