+++
title = "30 A Tantric Meditation on Emptiness"

+++

Donald S. Lopez, Jr.  

From the origins of Tantric Buddhism in India, origins that remain in many ways  mysterious, questions have been raised about the relation of Tantra to the pre existing traditions of Buddhist thought and practice. These questions have been  faced by scholars and practitioners throughout the Buddhist world over the course  of centuries, and continue to intrigue modern scholars of Buddhism. One way of  posing the questions has been: Does Tantra represent a complete and autonomous  system that replaces and surpasses all that has come before, or is Tantra a sup plement to be appended to the traditional path?  

Such questions were debated at great length in Tibet, and the text translated  below represents the views, offered in the form of a meditation manual, of one  of the most influential Tibetan participants in the debate over the nature of Tantra.  He is Tsong kha pa (1357-1419), whose followers would become the dGe lugs  (Gelugpa) sect of Tibetan Buddhism, the largest and most powerful in Tibet. One  of the hallmarks of Tsong kha pa's thought was his insistence on the harmony  between the exoteric and esoteric teachings of the Buddha or, as Tsong kha pa  put it, the compatibility of Sutra and Tantra.  

Tsong kha pa's most famous work, The Stages of the Path to Enlightenment (Byang  chub lam rim chen mo), sets forth the practice of a single individual from the first  sense of dissatisfaction with the sufferings of the world to the bodhisattva's insight  into the nature of reality. Tsong kha pa describes an evolution: one moves from  being a person who seeks only a better rebirth in the next life, to someone who  seeks to escape entirely from the cycle of rebirth (the Hinayana motivation), to  someone who seeks to become a buddha in order to provide the means for all  beings in the universe to escape from the cycle of rebirth (the Mahayana moti vation). Thus, for Tsong kha pa, there is a clear and intentional continuity between  the Hinayana and Mahayana paths.  

He finds a similar continuity between the exoteric and esoteric teachings of the  Buddha. For Tsong kha pa, Tantra is a form of Mahayana Buddhism: like others,  he divides the Mahayana into two parts, called the perfection vehicle (paramita-

524 DONAL D S . LOPEZ , JR.  

yana in Sanskrit, phar phyin theg pa in Tibetan) and the secret mantra vehicle  (guhyamantrayana in Sanskrit, gsang sngags theg pa in Tibetan). Both were taught  by the Buddha himself for bodhisattvas, persons who have vowed to achieve  buddhahood in order to free all beings in the universe from suffering. The secret  mantra vehicle (also known as the Tantric vehicle and the Vajra vehicle) was set  forth by the Buddha for "bodhisattvas of sharp faculties," that is, particularly  intelligent bodhisattvas whose compassion is so great that they are in a great hurry  to achieve buddhahood for the sake of others and have the capacity to use ex traordinary means to do so. For these rare bodhisattvas, the Buddha revealed a  more rapid path to enlightenment.  

The next question that faced Tsong kha pa (and other Tantric exegetes) was  precisely what it was about Tantra that made it a more rapid path; what were the  extraordinary means that the Buddha provided to allow the path to buddhahood  to be traversed more quickly than by the exoteric, or Sutra, path. Tsong kha pa,  following the lead of Indian scholars, approached the question in terms of method  and wisdom, the two factors deemed essential for the attainment of buddhahood.  Method encompasses the various ethical practices of the bodhisattva, practices  such as giving gifts, maintaining patience in all circumstances, keeping vows, and  developing deep states of concentration. Wisdom was the knowledge of the final  nature of reality. If Tantra was superior to Sutra, that superiority was to be found  in one or both of these domains.  

Tsong kha pa argued that there could be no wisdom more profound than that  set forth by the Buddha in the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras, and explicated by  the great master Nagarjuna. This wisdom was the knowledge of emptiness, the  fact that everything in the universe is devoid of an independent or intrinsic nature,  that everything in the universe, from physical forms to the omniscient conscious 

ness of the Buddha, is contingent, depending for its existence on its causes, on  its parts, or on a designating consciousness. Nothing exists in and of itself, nothing  is able to stand alone. To believe that anything, whether it be a person, a material  object, or an idea, exists autonomously, without depending on anything else, is  ignorance, and this ignorance is the cause of all suffering in the universe. To  understand that everything comes into being through other factors, that every 

thing, in Buddhist terms, is "dependently arisen," to understand that everything  is devoid of this falsely imagined independence - this is wisdom; and this wisdom  is essential to the attainment of liberation from rebirth, whether one follows the  Hinayana or the Mahayana, whether one follows the perfection vehicle or the  secret mantra vehicle. Thus, for Tsong kha pa, there is no difference in the pro 

fundity of the highest wisdom in Sutra and Tantra. The superiority of the Tantric  vehicle must therefore be found in the domain of method.  

Tsong kha pa argued that there was an important difference between the way  that method and wisdom were practiced in the Sutra vehicle. The purpose of  wisdom was to create the mind of a buddha, a mind that was in constant and full  awareness of the nature of reality, that is, of emptiness. In order to achieve such  a state, the bodhisattva was to meditate on emptiness now. There was thus a 

MEDITATIO N O N EMPTINES S 525  

similarity between the cause (meditation on emptiness) and the effect (realization  of emptiness). But the method component of the path lacked such a similarity.  Here, the goal was to achieve the magnificent form of a buddha, a body adorned  with the major and minor marks of a superman and endowed with all varieties  of supernormal powers. The exoteric technique was for the bodhisattva to engage  in limitless compassionate deeds. Tsong kha pa thus discerned a disjunction be 

tween the cause (compassionate deeds) and the effect (the body of a buddha). He  reasoned, therefore, that the Tantric vehicle offered a faster path to buddhahood  because it had a special method that did not occur in the Sutra system. He called  this method "deity yoga," and it involved visualizing oneself as a buddha: one  imagined oneself as having the magnificent body, speech, and mind of a buddha  now. This method was superior to performing compassionate deeds (which Tan 

tric bodhisattvas must also do) because of the similarity of the cause (imagining  oneself to be a buddha) to the effect (being a buddha). This method, this deity  yoga, was not only a superior method of achieving buddhahood; for Tsong kha  pa it was the essential method. It was his position that all bodhisattvas must  eventually enter the Tantric path to become buddhas, and that all bodhisattvas  who have achieved buddhahood in the past have done so via the Tantric path.  

The text translated below provides a striking example of Tsong kha pa's views  on what is, and is not, unique to the Tantric path. It is an early example of what  would become an important genre of dGe lugs literature, the "instructions on the  view" (Ita khrid), where "the view" is the correct view, that is, the correct under 

standing of emptiness. In contrast to philosophical texts that set forth elaborate  proofs of emptiness, supported by quotations from the Indian masters, works in  this genre are meant to serve as meditation manuals, providing specific and prac tical instructions on how to gain a deep understanding of emptiness. What is  particularly interesting and unusual about the text translated here is that it pro vides such instructions for a Tantric practitioner.  

It is a common tenet of Buddhist meditation theory that the ordinary human  mind is too weak and distracted to be able to understand reality (in this case,  emptiness) with sufficient depth and clarity to destroy the bonds of suffering and  rebirth. It is therefore necessary to transform the mind into a suitable instrument  for the understanding of reality, and this is achieved by developing a level of  concentration superior to that of everyday experience. Buddhist texts provide  elaborate descriptions of the levels of concentration that can be attained, and  identify one, called "quiescence" (samatha in Sanskrit, zhi gnas in Tibetan), as the  minimum level of mental strength at which emptiness may be understood in a  transformative way. Understanding emptiness at this level of concentration is  called "insight" (vipasyana in Sanskrit, lhag mthong in Tibetan). Specific instruc tions are provided for developing this level of concentration; in the Tibetan tra dition, these most commonly involve the sustained visualization of a golden image  of the Buddha. But as will be recalled, for Tsong kha pa the superiority of Tantra  lies in its extraordinary methods, and so here he offers a different set of instruc 

tions for developing quiescence, more complicated than that found in the exoteric 

526 DONAL D S . LOPEZ , JR.  

instructions, but designed to bring the meditator to the level of quiescence more  quickly.  

It is also Tsong kha pa's conviction that the emptiness taught in the Sutras is  identical to that taught in the Tantras.Thus, it is not surprising that, after pro viding Tantric instructions for developing quiescence, he goes on to provide in structions for meditating on emptiness that are in no way Tantric. Whether one  is following Sutra or Tantra, he argued, the reality and the path to its understand ing are the same. Tsong kha pa is emphatic here, as he is in all of his writings,  that there is only one route to the vision of emptiness, and that route is reasoning.  Emptiness is not self-evident. Indeed, to the unenlightened it is counterintuitive,  because things appear to be real when in fact they are not. One must therefore  seek diligently and dispassionately for the essence, for the self, that one falsely  imagines to exist. Tsong kha pa thus provides detailed instructions for searching  for the self among the places where is could possibly exist.  

The text begins with a statement, in Sanskrit, of homage to the bodhisattva  Manjusri. It is appropriate that Tsong kha pa invoke Manjusri here because he is  the bodhisattva of wisdom, and the text is devoted to instructions for developing  wisdom. But the bodhisattva is also invoked as the special protector of Tsong kha  pa, who is said to have often met face-to-face with the bodhisattva. This homage  is followed by a series of verses, with the remainder of the text presented as a  commentary on those verses. Tsong kha pa declares that the statement, "I will set  forth the mode of being just as it is, relying on the varieties of the dependently  arisen," summarizes the entire practice. The mode of being is emptiness, but it is  a central tenet of Madhyamaka (the Middle Way School of Buddhist philosophy)  that emptiness cannot be understood without making skillful use of the various  phenomena of the universe, the dependently arisen. Tsong kha pa will present in  some detail which of these phenomena are to be utilized, and how one is to gain  a vision of the nature of reality. After a cursory statement of standard Tantric  preparatory practices (regarding one's guru as a buddha, offering simulacra of the  universe to the buddhas and bodhisattvas, and reciting the purificatory mantra  of the buddha Vajrasattva) - all designed to accumulate merit and remove obsta cles and thus clearing the way for successful meditation - Tsong kha pa instructs  the practitioner to meditate on dependent arising in "positive and negative order."  Here dependent arising does not refer to the general Madhyamaka tenet of the  mutual dependence of the phenomena of the universe, but rather to a specific  sequence of dependence or cause and effect. This is the famous twelvefold de pendent origination that some early texts identity as the content of the Buddha's  enlightenment. In brief, it sets forth the sequence of ignorance, karmic condition,  consciousness, name and form, sources, contact, feeling, attachment, grasping,  birth, aging, and death. Although this list is widely interpreted, it is often seen as  a description of how ignorance leads, over the course of one lifetime to the next,  to aging and death - as Tsong kha pa explains. To meditate on these in the  positive order is to examine the sequence, seeing how one leads to another. Such  understanding induces a sense of revulsion toward samsara. To meditate on theMEDITATIO N O N EMPTINES S 527  

list in the negative order does not mean to go through the list backward but to  negate each element. Thus, by stopping ignorance, one stops karmic conditions,  by stopping karmic condition, one stops consciousness; and so on. The point is  that by destroying ignorance, the first cause in the sequence, the edifice of samsara  will collapse.  

Tsong kha pa then turns to detailed instructions on how to conduct a medi tation retreat designed to result in the achievement of the state of concentration  (or samadhi) called quiescence. After finding a place that is physically conducive  to practice, the meditator sits down and visualizes himself or herself as the chosen  buddha or bodhisattva, in this case the bodhisattva Manjusri. The guru is visu alized as a miniature buddha, seated on a lotus at one of three places: the top of  the meditator's head, in the throat, or at the heart. With these Tantric visualiza tions in place, the meditator declares the Mahayana motivation to deliver all  beings to buddhahood and undertakes the meditative session proper with that  motivation.  

The cultivation of quiescence takes place over three stages, focused on the body,  speech, and mind of the meditator visualized as a buddha. In the first stage, the  meditator is a white Manjusri. On the crown of the head sits his or her teacher  in the form of a miniature white buddha Vairocana. At the center of Vairocana's  heart is a flat moon disk, upon which stands the syllable Om. Directly in front of  the meditator's eyes (or, if preferable, directly across from the heart) a small moon  disk floats in space. Seated upon it is a miniature blue buddha Aksobhya. Finally,  the meditator visualizes a white drop the size of a pea on the ground directly in  front of where he or she is seated. With this somewhat complicated visualization  in place, the actual meditation begins. The meditator shifts his or her attention  in sequence between three points: the blue buddha in front of the eyes, the Om  at the heart of the buddha seated on top of the head, and the drop on the ground.  As mentioned above, the standard Sutra version of quiescence meditation is much  less complex; the meditator simply visualizes a golden buddha in space. Here,  the meditator must maintain a clear visualization of himself or herself as the  bodhisattva Manjusri while shifting attention among three objects in sequence.  Tsong kha pa specifies that the meditator should dwell on each object for between  seven and one hundred "manis," that is, the length of time it takes to say the  famous mantra Om mani padme hum. The process is then repeated, substituting  a yellow buddha Ratnasambhava for the blue Aksobhya in front. Next, the yellow  buddha is replaced by a red Amitabha, a green Amoghasiddhi, and a white Vai rocana. In this way, the buddhas of the five lineages are taken as the object of  concentration in the space in front of the meditator, with the remainder of the  visualization remaining the same. After this, the buddhas of the three lineages are  used, followed by one lineage, where the buddha Vajradhara or Vajrasattva is  visualized.  

Tsong kha pa turns next to the instructions for meditation on the speech of a  buddha. Here the meditator visualizes himself or herself as a red Manjusri, with  the lama taking the form of the red buddha Amitabha, residing not at the crown 

528 DONAL D S . LOPEZ , JR.  

of the head but in the throat, the seat of speech. At his heart is the letter ah,  symbolizing the purification of speech. In the space in front, the meditator vi sualizes not a moon disk with a buddha seated upon it but a moon disk with  letters standing upright upon it. These letters are in nineteen groups: the three  root mantras Om, ah, and hum, the vowels of the Sanskrit alphabet in eight groups,  and the consonants of the Sanskrit alphabet in eight groups. The meditator is to  focus on each of these eighteen groups in sequence as the third component in  the rotation, focusing concentration in turn on the ah in the center of Amitabha's  heart, the drop on the ground (now red in color), and letters or group of letters  on the moon floating in space.  

In the meditation on the mind of a buddha, the meditator visualizes himself  or herself as a blue Manjusri, with the lama in the form of the blue Aksobhya at  his heart, the seat of the mind. In the lama's heart is the blue letter hum, repre senting the purification of the mind. In the space in front, a nine-pointed blue  vajra stands upright on a moon disk. The meditator shifts focus among the hum  at Aksobhya's heart, the drop on the ground (now blue), and the vajra. The vajra  is what Aksobhya holds in his hand. After focusing on the vajra, the meditator is  to substitute what the other four buddhas of the five lineages hold in their hands:  a jewel, a lotus, a sword, and a wheel.  

Among the more interesting elements in Tsong kha pa's texts are his instruc tions on how to deal with experiences (nyams) that may occur as a result of  meditation. This is a technical term that refers to the various apparitions, hallu cinations, and visions (both visual and auditory) that may occur in the course of  meditation, but that are not signs of authentic success in the practice. They are  instead the side effects of concentration on the various energies or "winds" that  course through the body. All manner of visions may occur, and it is important  not to give them credence or let them distract attention from the meditation.  Tsong kha pa does not deny that some of these experience may indeed be verid ical; they are not necessarily all hallucinations. He therefore provides techniques  for determining whether the various supernatural beings that materialize before  the meditator are real or not. If what appears really is a buddha or bodhisattva,  one should ask them to bestow magical powers (siddhis). If the meditator is simply  overwhelmed by a multitude of apparitions, he or she should shift attention to  the first of the apparitions to appear, until it disappears. Tsong kha pa also offers  some fascinating remedies for dealing with the concentration of energies in the  head that result from increased concentration.  

Having provided the technique for turning the mind into a suitable instrument  for the realization of emptiness, he turns next to instructions intended to bring  about such realization. He approaches the topic in terms of the classic categories  of the selflessness or lack of self, of persons and phenomena. It should be un 

derstood that self in this sense does not mean a soul but rather a quality of  independence. In this sense, it can be said that everything in the universe, both  persons and other phenomena, is devoid of self. He states at the end of the text 

MEDITATION ON EMPTINESS 529  

that it is essential that one first have some idea of what this self is like before one  sets out in search of it. In keeping with Tsong kha pa's dictum that the emptiness  taught in the Tantras is identical to that taught in the Sutras, there is nothing that  one might identify as "Tantric" about his instructions for meditation on emptiness.  He makes use of the classic Buddhist categories - such as the five aggregates, the  six sources, the five elements - and subjects each to analytical scrutiny, breaking  each down into its constituent parts, searching for a self, and finding none. This  apparently tedious procedure is deemed necessary in order to come to the con fident conclusion that the insidious self is not to be found anywhere. This "non 

finding" is the absence of self, or emptiness. He examines both the things of  samsara, such as the human body and a clay pot, and the things of nirvana, such  as the body, speech, and mind of a buddha, and finds them all to be devoid of  self, all to be empty. This is what Tsong kha pa calls the equality of mundane  existence and peace.  

For reasons of length, the final portion of the text is not translated. Here Tsong  kha pa provides a philosophical discussion, replete with quotations from the  Madhyamaka masters Nagarjuna, Aryadeva, and Candrakirti, of precisely what  emptiness means, dwelling at length on the classic Madhyamaka category of the  two truths.  

Tsong kha pa concludes with a declaration of his conviction that Nagarjuna  offers the authentic path to the knowledge of emptiness, whether one follows the  path of Sutra or Tantra. The text ends with Tsong kha pa's prayer, requesting  blessings from the buddhas and bodhisattvas, for himself and for all beings in the  universe.  

The text, entitled dBu ma Ita ba'i khrid yig, is translated from The Collected Works  (gsun 'bum) of the Incomparable Lord Tsoh-kha-pa bLo-bzan-grags-pa (Khams gsum  chos kyis [sic] rgyal po shar tsong kha pa chen po'i gsung 'bum), vol. ba, l-24a (New  Delhi: Mongolian Lama Guru Deva, 1978). MHTL no. 13943, P. no. 6140, To hoku no. 5405.  

Further Reading  

For a general survey of Indian Buddhist Tantra, see David Snellgrove, Indo-Tibetan  Buddhism, vol. 1 (Boston: Shambhala, 1987). On Tsong kha pa's exposition of  emptiness, see Elizabeth Napper, Dependent Arising and Emptiness (Boston: Wis dom Publications, 1989). On Tsong kha pa's views of the difference between  Sutra and Tantra, see Jeffrey Hopkins, Tantra in Tibet (Ithaca, N. Y.: Snow Lion,  1987. For a discussion of the ancient and modern views on the nature of Tantra,  with an analysis of a Tantric meditation, see Donald S. Lopez, Jr., Elaborations on  Emptiness: Use of the Heart Sutra (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1996),  pp. 78-140. 

530 DONAL D S . LOPEZ , JR.  

Written Instructions on the Madhyamaka View  

by Tsong kha pa  

Namo Guru Aryamanjusriye  

I will set forth the mode of being just as it is, relying on the varieties of the  dependently arisen.  

I go for refuge, amass the collections, clear away obstructions, and meditate  on dependent arising in positive and negative order. Having the nature of the  body, speech, and mind of a buddha and relying on advice on the profound,  I - a fortunate practitioner of enlightenment - am absorbed in samadhi, know 

ing that all phenomena of samsara and nirvana, appearance and emptiness - whatever is dependently arisen - are without intrinsic nature.  Neither body, speech, and mind nor the collected aggregates is established  as the self. There is also no self apart from them. Therefore, understand that  this is the meaning of selflessness.  

The aggregates and the sources, the elements, what arises from the elements,  virtue and nonvirtue, appearance and emptiness, samsara and nirvana, all phe nomena, whatever is dependently arisen is without intrinsic nature.  

Free from production, cessation, and abiding, beyond expression as existent  or nonexistent, as is or is not, free from elaboration, indivisible. Whoever un derstands this profound peace passes beyond sorrow. These are the virtuous  vajra words of instruction on the view of the equality of mundane existence  and peace.  

Homage to the lama and the venerable protector Manjughosa. Here, in order  to set forth the instructions on the view of the equality of mundane existence  and peace, there are three topics: the preparation, the basic practice, and sub sequent identification of emptiness [not translated here]. The statement, "I will  set forth the mode of being just as it is, relying on the varieties of the depend ently arisen," summarizes everything.  

First, the statement of the preparation, "I go for refuge, amass the collections,  clear away obstructions." Cultivate guru yoga, which causes blessings to de scend, draw mandalas, which brings about the amassing of collections of merit,  and meditate on and repeat the hundred-letter mantra, which causes obstruc tions to be cleared away. Most of this can be learned elsewhere.  

Second, the actual practice has two parts, the ordinary and the special. First,  "Dependent arising in positive and negative order." Meditate on dependent  arising in positive and negative order in order to renounce samsara and in  order to understand that ignorance is the root of all faults. Meditate on depen 

dent arising in positive and negative order so that you can understand that, in  order to attain liberation and omniscience, you must abandon the view of self,  the conception of "I," and realize the meaning of the mode of being. 

MEDITATIO N O N EMPTINES S 531  

The first of these is meditation on the positive order. Ignorance is the con ception of self, holding that which arises in dependence on the coming together  of the five aggregates to be a person and a sentient being. When one is under  the power of the conception of self, you conceive yourself, which in fact is  selfless, to be self, and you hold the impure to be pure and unhappiness to be  happiness. Through being deceived by the four inverted views [seeing the im pure as pure, the impermanent as permanent, unhappiness as happiness, and  the selfless as self], you think, "This is my companion, my friend, my ally, and  my blood relative, this person helped me, this person is on my side." You amass  limitless karma produced entirely by desire. Also, you think, "This is my en emy, he is on the other side that does me harm." You amass limitless karma  produced entirely by hatred. Similarly, there is the desire that wants nothing  but happiness, fame, resources, riches, honor, and marvelous things for your self and those who clearly believe in you and are on your side. And there is  the hatred that wonders whether those who are clearly on the other side will  bring nothing but insults, ill repute, poverty, destitution, a short life, many  illnesses, bad luck, and masses of problems. Having come under the power of  such desire and hatred, the afflictions rise like the current of a river: dissension,  quarreling, covetousness, harmful intent, wrong view, killing, taking what is  not given, sexual misconduct, senseless speech, harsh speech, divisive speech,  and lying, and also jealousy, contentiousness, contempt, and pride. Having  amassed limitless collections of sins, there arises a collection of karmic con ditions that serves as the cause of experiences impossible to bear, the endless  sufferings of the unfortunate realms. This occurs solely in dependence on the  conception of self.  

In dependence on that karmic condition, consciousness arises. In depen dence on consciousness, there is name and form. Name is fourfold: feeling,  discrimination, compositional factors, and consciousness. Form is the embryo  that grows in stages from the mixing of the father's semen and mother's blood.  In dependence on name and form, the sources arise and in dependence on the  coming together of three - the sense organ, the consciousness, and the ob ject - contact occurs. In dependence on that, feeling arises, which experiences  things as pleasurable, painful, or neutral. In dependence on that, attachment  arises: if the feeling is pleasant, there is attachment that desires not to separate  from it; if the feeling is painful, there is attachment that desires to get rid of it;  if the feeling is neutral, there is desire to remain equanimously. In dependence  of that, there arises grasping, which experiences the object directly and appro priates it. In dependence on that, there arises existence, which brings about  the experience of the sufferings of the unfortunate realms and of samsara. In  dependence on that, there arise the collections of the unfortunate realms and  rebirth. In dependence on that, aging and death arise. Aging is the complete  maturation of the body. Death is the complete abandonment of the body.  

Furthermore, in dependence on the ignorance and karmic condition, and  the consciousness from a former life, everything from the name and form 

532 DONAL D S . LOPEZ , JR.  

through the existence of this life arise; in dependence on that the birth, aging,  and death of the subsequent life arise. Furthermore, in dependence on the  ignorance, karmic condition, and consciousness of this life, everything from  the name and form through the existence of a future life arise. In dependence  on that also the birth, aging, and death of a future life arise. Understand all  past and future lives in that way. Thus, all sentient beings powerlessly undergo  endless sufferings impossible to bear, like the water on the waterwheel of the  twelvefold dependent arising.  

Second, meditation on dependent arising in the negative order. In that way,  all the sufferings of the unfortunate realms and samsara have the nature of the  conception of self. Therefore, by abandoning the conception of self, all the  sufferings of the unfortunate realms and samsara will be stopped. As long as  one has not abandoned the conception of self, all sufferings will rise like the  current of a river because the nature of all causes and conditions of all suffering  is that conception of self. For example, as long as a great ocean exists, there  will be drops of water.  

Question: What abandons that conception of self? Answer: It is abandoned  by the wisdom that understands selflessness. Question: Can't it be abandoned  otherwise, by virtuous deeds? Answer: Even those, because they are branches  of the conception of self, cause afflictions in some situations, particularly in  cases of desire, hatred, jealousy. There are afflictions that arise in dependence  on the qualities of scholarship, such as pride that thinks, "I have become a  great scholar by virtue of study and contemplation," and "I am wise." There is  jealousy and contention, contempt, and insulting others in every way. Also,  some who have attained and abide in the sources of quiescence in an isolated  place have good qualities to varying degrees. Because of their experience, they  think that they are superior in all ways to other scholars who do not abide in  an isolated place. They produce afflictions such as contempt for and jealousy  of excellent beings like monks. Furthermore, whatever virtues might be per formed - giving, maintaining ethics, cultivating patience, undertaking effort,  being absorbed in concentration - serve merely as antidotes to the afflictions.  Even though some temporary happy effects arise, it does not bring about the  attainment of the final happiness of liberation and omniscience, nor does it  abandon all the obstructions, because it lacks the wisdom that understands  selflessness. Thus, virtuous deeds other than the wisdom that understands self lessness are not able to abandon the conception of self. As long as you conceive  of "I" in dependence on aggregates that are conceived as a self, there is no  opportunity to be liberated from the unfortunate realms and the sufferings of  samsara. The noble Nagarjuna said, "As long as the conception of the aggregates  exists, the conception of the I exists. When the conception of the I exists, there  is action; from that comes birth." And the master Candrakirti said, "Homage  to the compassion for transmigrators who are powerless like a bucket traveling  in a well through initially conceiving of a self, 'I,' and creating attachment to  things, saying 'This is mine.'" 

MEDITATIO N O N EMPTINES S 533  

Therefore, yogins are not attached to body, life, acquisition, honor, poetry,  or, in the end, even to food and drink. Like someone trying to put out a fire  on his body or head, they make great effort and practice austerities . They rely  on a teacher who has the signs of the Mahayana, they practice the profound  instructions, they understand that the five aggregates lack intrinsic nature, and  they put an end to the conception of self. By putting an end to the conception  of self, they stop the coming together of karmic conditions. By stopping that,  they stop the coming together of consciousness. By stopping that, they stop  name and form. By stopping that, they stop the sources. By stopping that,  contact; by stopping that, feeling; by stopping that, attachment; by stopping  that, grasping; by stopping that, existence; by stopping that, they stop birth.  By stopping that, they stop both aging and death. Thus, know that all suffering  together with its causes arises from the conception of self and the source of all  benefit and happiness is the wisdom that understands selflessness. These set  forth the statement, "Meditate on dependent arising in positive and negative  order."  

The second, the special actual practice, has two parts, setting forth the initial  training and setting forth the stages of practice. First, avoid staying in the low  part of a house because lethargy increases there and the upper part of the house  because excitement increases there. Make the place of meditation in the middle  of the house, under a roof, where there is the right amount of heat and cold.  Also have the right amount of food and drink. Get rid of all conditions con 

tradictory to the practice of virtue, like bad friends. Make arrangements for all  the concordant conditions like food and clothing. You must be able to abide  only in the practice of virtue without needing to do anything other than abide  in the practice and benefit beings.  

The second has two parts: setting forth quiescence and setting forth insight.  Regarding the first, it says, "Having the nature of the body, speech, and mind  of a buddha and relying on advice on the profound, I - a fortunate practitioner  of enlightenment - am absorbed in samadhi." This has two parts: setting forth  the entity of quiescence and identifying the subsequent experiences. The first  has three parts: cultivating samadhi in dependence on the nature of body, the  nature of speech, and the nature of mind. Here, the three preparations for  all practices are meditating on your body as the body of the tutelary deity  (yi dam), meditating on the lama in any of the three places [the crown of the  head, throat, or heart], and cultivating love, compassion, and the aspiration  to enlightenment; cultivate the aspiration to enlightenment, thinking "I will  definitely bring all sentient beings, equal to the limits of space, to the level  of complete buddhahood. For that purpose I will practice these profound  instructions."  

The nature of body has three parts: meditation based on the five lineages,  the three lineages, and the single lineage. The first: meditate on yourself as a  white Manjusri. On the crown of you* head is [your lama in the form of] a  white Vairocana. At his heart is a white Om on top of a moon. In space in front 

534 DONAL D S . LOPEZ , JR.  

of the point between your eyebrows, visualize on a moon a blue Aksobhya a  span or just an inch in size. All three have one face and two hands in the  posture of equipoise. At the points where the fourth fingers and thumbs touch,  they hold [the stems of] blue lotus flowers. On top of the blossoms next to  their ears, there is a vajra and bell. They sit with their legs in the vajra posture.  They are adorned with silk and precious ornaments. They are peaceful, and  smiling, their bodies radiant and beautiful. Meditate on them as appearing but  without intrinsic nature, like a reflection in a mirror.  

Meditate on a white drop on the ground, on a straight line from the point  at the tip of your nose; it is suitable for it to be just the size of a pea or a little  bigger. You can draw it or imagine it. Sit with your two legs in the vajra posture  and your two hands in equipoise. Place your body, straighten your spine, point  your eyes at the tip of your nose, draw in your chin, put the tip of your tongue  on your palate, and straighten your shoulders. As for your mind, without con 

ceiving any activities in the three times - past, present, and future - to be good  or bad, be in equipoise, shifting the visualization in turn from the deity either  between the eyes or at the heart, the Om at the heart of the teacher [on the  crown of your head], and the drop [below] the tip of the nose. Also, whatever  occurs, such as your legs hurting or your eyes burning and watering, do not  break the posture. Don't touch anything; there is benefit in remaining just as  you are. Although you remain focused in visualization for a long time on only  one base of visualization, it is difficult to eliminate thought. Therefore, don't  remain on any one base of visualization longer than the time of counting one  hundred manis. But don't do it for a very short time; be in equipoise on each  for just the time of counting seven or ten manis.  

Next, the others are not different from before. In the place of the blue deity  in front, visualize the others individually: a yellow deity, a red deity, a green  deity, and a white deity. Do five cycles of visualization. Using these bases of  visualization, you stop the conception of subject and object and wish to abide  in the samadhi in which the mind is without thought, such that you do not  lose focus on the base of visualization. Whatever other conceptions of subject  and object are produced, totally eliminate diffusion and abide undistractedly  in the state of mind of being without thought.  

Second, based on the nature of the three lineages. The others are similar to  the above. Meditate, doing cycles of visualization on the white, red, and blue  deities, respectively, in front of you. No matter how short [a time] you do each  of these cycles of visualization, do not do them less than five days each. Third,  cultivate samadhi based on one lineage. Meditate on either Vajrasattva or Vaj 

radhara in front of you; the other parts are like above. Thus, based on the  nature of the body, there are nine objects of visualization.  

At the time of cultivating samadhi based on those, if the mind still will not  remain settled due to excessive excitement, meditate on the lama in your heart  instead of on the top of your head. Meditate on the deity in front at a point  across from your heart and hold the mind as before. If you meditate too much, 

MEDITATION ON EMPTINESS 535  

the body and mind get too tense and problems will occur such as heart wind,  and you will not want to remain in meditation. Therefore, don't lose the physi cal posture; remain relaxed. Relying on the mental base of visualization, having  eliminated totally the diffusion and contraction that occurs from the dispersion  and gathering of thought, remain in equipoise in the state of relaxation without  distraction within the state of nonconception. Do not move even for a moment.  

Put aside all activities of body, speech, and mind temporarily; do not analyze  or investigate, have no hopes or doubts. If you have something virtuous to do  physically or verbally that is very important, do it at noon or when you have  finished eating and drinking. Otherwise at those times, go for refuge, meditate  on the unpredictability of death, and on love, compassion, and the aspiration  to enlightenment for just a bit. Apart from these [times], only meditate; med 

itate in the early evening and dawn because your awareness is clear at those  times. If you become exhausted doing other things during the day, don't de prive yourself of sleep.  

Second, the cultivation of samadhi based on the nature of speech. Meditate  on yourself as a red deity and your lama in the form of a red Amitabha at your  throat. Imagine a seed syllable in place of the deity in front and imagine a red  ah in place of the Om at the lama's heart. Everything else is the same as above.  Also, in the space in front on a moon disc are three cycles of visualization of  Om ah hum, eight cycles of visualization in eight sections - [1] a a [2] i i [3]  u u [4] ri ri [5] li li [6] e ai [7] o au [8] am ah - and eight cycles of visualization  in eight sections - [1] ka kha ga gha nga [2] ca chajajha nya [3] ta tha da dha  na [4] ta tha da dha na [5] pa pha ba bha ma [6] ya ra la va [7] sa sa sa ha ksa  [8] ya ra la va da da - making nineteen cycles of visualization. Greatly con densed, there is one cycle of visualization of the three seed syllables and a cycle  of visualization each for the vowels and consonants [making] three cycles of  visualization. Thus, for all the visualizations, alternate, meditating on the letters  in front, not one but in sequence, and alternate as before, remaining on the  letter ah at the lama's heart and the letters.  

Whatever experiences occur due to meditation - experiences of bliss, ex periences of being empty, experiences of clarity, seeing things, hearing  things - don't reject them or accept them, don't be discouraged or pleased;  sustain the same samadhi. Act similarly regarding rough experiences, danger ous beasts, and vicious nonhumans that come during waking experience, in  dreams, and in visions. Anything unpleasant that they do are experiences. In  the same way, innumerable buddhas and bodhisattvas come. Whatever oc curs - their teaching the dharma or making prophecies - are experiences.  Whatever happens, like offerings made to you by sons and daughters of gods,  are experiences. Therefore, sustain samadhi without rejecting or accepting  them. If there are reasons and signs that it is not an experience, decide by  means of dividing the various types into three categories: if it is your deity, ask  for actual achievement (siddhi). If it is an experience, sustain what you were  doing before. If it is a nonhuman, having analyzed the situation, instruct the 

536 DONAL D S . LOPEZ , JR.  

kind who will become supportive of your practice and expel the kind that  creates obstacles.  

Regarding apparitions, if measureless apparitions occurs, take the first ap parition that occurs as the base of visualization. Without letting others enter  your awareness, remain in equipoise on the first. Then, when the apparition  fades, be in equipoise on whatever occurs next. When that fades, take what  arises newly as the base of visualization. In that way, sustain it as before as  long as there are apparitions.  

Whatever physical postures and glances have been explained to you, do not  produce them. Without strongly tightening the mind, relax the entire body  and the mind and don't lose hold of the essential parts of the posture, the  unmistaken glance, and the mindfulness of the undistracted mind. This is most  essential. If the body is sick, at midday and when the stomach is empty from  not eating food, use whatever exercises that help. Furthermore, because sick 

nesses of cold, fever, and so forth occur, take the right kind of medicine.  Third, cultivating samadhi in dependence on the nature of the mind. You  are the blue deity. At your heart is your lama in the form of a blue Aksobhya.  At his heart on a moon disc is a blue hum. On the ground at the point of the  tip of your nose is a blue drop. The way that all of them abide, their ornaments,  hand implements, and so forth are as before. In the place of the deity between  the eyebrows is a blue nine-pointed vajra on a moon disc. Meditate on it as  appearing clearly but without intrinsic nature. As before, based on the visual ization of the three - the hum at the lama's heart, the drop on the ground, and  the vajra - be in equipoise.  

Whatever you do - getting up, moving about, speaking - do it skillfully and  slowly; don't lose hold of undistracted mindfulness. This is extremely impor tant. When you sleep, focus on the visualization of the lama at the heart and  sleep without distraction. When you have completed this visualization cycle,  in place of the vajra in front, base the visualization on a jewel, lotus, sword,  and wheel. The rest is as before. Visualize the symbols: five visualizations based  on the hand implements of the five lineages. If a definite certainty of being in  quiescence does not arise, meditate on the implements of the five consorts, the  four doorkeepers of the mandala, and the thirty-two implements of [the wrath ful buddha] Bhairava, respectively. If there is excessive lethargy on those oc casions, meditate on the lama at the crown of your head. Visualize the imple ments in front and the drop and meditate as before.  

When the mind has become very clear, the winds will increase upward.  When there is a swelling at the Brahma aperture [at the top of the skull),  itching, or your head hurts, tie your belt around your head. Put a container of  jewels such as 'gu rtse on top of your head. Imagine that the Brahma aperture  is blocked with a golden crossed vajra. Put your two legs straight out with your  two arms in line with your feet and imagine that on the soles of your two feet  there is a white letter a. Focus on the visualization of that. If that doesn't help,  transform your mind into a blue hum on a thousand-petaled white lotus on aMEDITATIO N O N EMPTINES S 537  

base of gold. Emerging from the anus, think that it comes gently to rest. Then,  imagine a series of hums from your own heart, [going] from your anus in that  way and melting into the earlier hum. Do that until it helps. Or, rise, imagining  yourself as the deity, making vajra fists [index and little finger extended and  middle and ring fingers held by thumb] crossed at the heart and crouch with  your two heels together touching your thighs, hold your breath, and jump. If  nothing comes from that, cover your head with your hand and put your heels  together or separately and softly rub and hit your thighs. Furthermore, if you  have pain, understand it having compared it with the needs and circumstances  of any of the qualities of [the deity] Isvara.  

Second, identifying visions. Any experience that occurs based on the body - the body shaking or bliss - is physical experience. The utterance of Sanskrit  language and the unintentional utterance of verses is verbal experience. Re garding the mind, producing the samadhis of happiness, bliss, and the non conceptual, no matter how auspicious, is to be understood as experience as  long as insight is not produced. As signs of conjunction with the earth wind,  water wind, fire wind, wind wind, and space wind, there is, respectively, physi cal heaviness, cold, warmth, lightness, and becoming empty through the vision  of having no body. Regarding apparitions, seeing smoke, fireflies, mirages,  hooks, drops, the sky free from clouds, rainbows, sun and moon, stars, and  golden earth, and so forth, fire, water, the body of the Tathagata [the Buddha]  the six abodes of rebirth, and the billion worlds - whatever apparitions appear  are signs of the conjunction of wind and mind. Therefore, know that they are  apparitions. Hearing sounds like a bee, poetic Sanskrit verses, heart mantras  of the deity, whatever occurs, good or bad, pleasant or unpleasant, know to be  experiences that are aural apparitions. By practicing without adopting or dis carding, rejecting or accepting such visions, you will produce the samadhi of  insight.  

Second, the practice of insight has two parts, meditation on the selflessness  of the person and meditation on the selflessness of phenomena. Regarding the  first, it says, "Neither body, speech, and mind or the collected aggregates is  established as the self. There is also no self apart from them. Therefore, un 

derstand that this is the meaning of selflessness." This has two parts, meditating  on the body, speech, and mind as without self, and meditating on the five  aggregates as without self. The first has three parts, meditating on body, speech,  and mind as without self. First, adopt the physical posture and gaze as before.  Remain like that and meditate, knowing through scripture and reasoning that  this body of yours is not established. There are six objects of consciousness,  such as form [sounds, odors, tastes, objects of touch, and phenomena]. Form  includes the head, legs, arms, chest, intestines, flesh, blood, pus, marrow, the  sense organs, winds, channels, warmth, impurities. None of these individually  is established as the body. Therefore, the body is not established anywhere  apart from them. By analyzing well in that way, you will not find any body  anywhere. Eliminating dispersion and agitation by the conception of subject 

538 DONAL D S . LOPEZ , JR.  

and object, be in equipoise on just that. If the mind becomes dispersed, decide  that the body is not established anywhere as before and is not to be found. Be  in equipoise on just that. By meditating in that way every day, decide that the  body cannot be found and meditate on the fact that the parts of the body are  not established when they are divided individually. Thus, regarding the head,  the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, mouth, teeth, lips, hair, brain, flesh, blood, bone,  pus, tears, mucous, saliva, the upper skull, the lower skull, and the body hairs  individually are not the head. Therefore, having analyzed well that the head is  not to be found anywhere, place yourself in equipoise on just that as before.  Understand it in that way. Similarly, the ear is not established. The ear is not  established anywhere in the ten directions; having divided each of the direc tions into minute parts, it not established anywhere. Understand everything in  that way.  

Know that the entity of speech is also not established. Second, understand  that the speech of the past has ceased, the speech of the future has not been  produced, and present speech is not established as "This is it." Speech cannot  be found anywhere. Be in equipoise on the state of just that. Third, the mind  does not abide from the crown of the head to the soles of the feet and does not  exist elsewhere. It also does not exist anywhere between the head and feet. In  that case, the mind is not found anywhere. Be in equipoise on the state of just  that. Third, thus, because body, speech, and mind are not established any where, those three are not self, the self is not other than them and the self is  also not established in between. Therefore, be in equipoise in the state that  begins with that not finding of the self.  

Second, meditation on the five aggregates as selfless. First, regarding the form  aggregate, if you analyze individually color, shape, touch, smell, and taste, they  are not the self. Similarly, if you analyze them individually in terms of parts - the cardinal directions and particles - they are not established as the entity of  form. Be in equipoise in the state of just that. Second, the feeling aggregate:  feeling is the experience of pleasure, pain, or neutrality. By analyzing whether  they abide outside, inside, or between the body, they are not established as the  entity of feeling. Thus, be in equipoise in the state of just that. Third, medi 

tation on the nonestablishment of discrimination. Be in equipoise on the dis crimination that discriminate objects individually, as in the case of feeling.  Fourth, meditation on the conditioning factors aggregate as not established.  Understand that conditioning factors, which have the nature of attachment and  aversion, rejection and acceptance, are like feeling, and be in equipoise. Fifth,  meditation on the entity of consciousness as not being established. The collec tions of consciousness that individually apprehend objects such as form do not  abide in the top or bottom of the body or outside, inside, or in between; they  do not abide in the cardinal directions of the body, or above or below; they do  not abide someplace other than those. Therefore, be in equipoise in the state  of not finding. Therefore, when the five aggregates are analyzed individually,  they are not established anywhere. Therefore, the five aggregates are not the 

MEDITATIO N O N EMPTINES S 539  

self. The self is also not the five aggregates; a self is not established apart from  the five aggregates and the five aggregates also are not intrinsically established.  Be in equipoise in the state beginning with the nonobservation of the self  anywhere and understand that the self is dependently arisen in the sense of  not being intrinsically established. Until you have generated a pure ascertaining  consciousness, which decides that the self is dependently arisen, meditate re 

peatedly on the object of observation.  

Second, meditation on the selflessness of phenomena. It says, "The aggre gates and the sources, the elements, what arises from the elements, virtue and  nonvirtue, appearance and emptiness, samsara and nirvana, all phenomena,  whatever is dependently arisen is without intrinsic nature." This has two parts:  meditation on the impure phenomena of samsara as selfless and meditation on  the pure phenomena of nirvana as selfless. The first has two parts: meditation  on objects as without intrinsic nature and meditation on subjects as without  intrinsic nature. Regarding the first, meditate on everything, like the five ele ments, the five things that arise from the elements, the constituents, sources,  as without intrinsic nature. First, meditation on the earth element as not in trinsically established. Observe something made of earth. By analyzing its  shape, color, feel, and so forth individually, it is not established as earth.  Through analyzing it in terms of its cardinal directions and particles, it is also  not established as earth. Be in equipoise in the state of earth not existing in trinsically. Understand the same thing about water. Regarding fire, it arises in  dependence on tinder, the effort of a person's hands, and so forth. If these are  analyzed individually, it does not arise from any of them. Upon analyzing the  shape, color, feel, and so forth, they are not fire. Be in equipoise as before.  Observe wind. It does not arise from the cardinal directions or above and below.  Upon analyzing its shape individually, it is not established, as before. Space  does not first come from any direction; it does not then go back again. Because  the present entity is not established anywhere, the five elements are not intrin sically established. Be in equipoise in that way.  

Meditate on the five things arisen from the elements as not intrinsically  established. Observe something like the visible form of a pot. Its shape, color,  feel, mouth and neck, belly base, inside and outside are not established as the  pot individually. Therefore, be in equipoise as before. In the same way, observe  sounds, odors, tastes, and objects of touch individually. Upon analyzing the  individual aspects of the cardinal directions, above and below, the three - inside, outside, and in between - the top and bottom, the shape, the color,  sound, odor, taste, the feel do not arise from any of these. They are not inher 

ently established. Therefore, be in equipoise in the state of that.  Thus, all conditioned phenomena, such as the aggregates illustrated with the  five elements and the five things arisen from the elements, the constituents,  and sources are naturally free from elaboration, and unconditioned phenom ena, illustrated by space, are naturally free from elaboration. In general, un derstand that just as the two types of phenomena are free from elaboration, all 

540 DONAL D S . LOPEZ , JR.  

phenomena are dependently arisen, in that they are without intrinsic nature,  free from elaboration, profound, tranquil, not intrinsically established as the  entity of anything whatsoever.  

Second, meditation on subjects as not intrinsically existent. An eye con sciousness arises in dependence on the conjunction of the eye sense organ, a  form, and a prior substantial cause, and so forth. Upon analyzing that, the prior  substantial cause is not the eye consciousness, the two - the eye sense organ  [and] the object (that is, the form) - the color, the shape the feel, the outside,  inside and in between, the cardinal directions, above and below, and the middle  area: [these] are not the eye consciousness. It does not abide in any of those  individually and it does not go to or come from any of those. The eye con sciousness does not intrinsically exist. Be in equipoise in the state of that non finding. In the same way, the ear consciousness, the nose consciousness, the  tongue consciousness, the body consciousness, and the mental consciousness  arise respectively in dependence on the conjunction of their respective sense  organ and substantial cause; that is, the sound, odor, taste, object of touch, or  phenomenon that is its object. However, upon analyzing them individually,  they do not intrinsically exist. Therefore, be in equipoise in that understanding,  as above. Thus, all phenomena of samsara comprised by objects and subject  exist as entities in the analysis of dependent arising; they are not intrinsically  established. Understand them to be like illusions, dreams, and mirages.  

Second, the meditation on the phenomena of nirvana as not intrinsically  existent has three parts: meditation on the body, speech, and mind of a buddha  as not intrinsically existent. First, meditation on the appearance of a form body  lacks intrinsic existence. Take the body of the Tathagata as the basis of visu 

alization and consider the limbs of the body like the head and hands, the senses  organs like the eyes, the thirty-two major marks like the crown protrusion, the  eighty minor marks like copper-colored fingernails, and the hair pores. By  analyzing them individually, none of them is established as the body of the  Tathagata. Similarly, it does not arise from the cardinal directions, above, be 

low, the aggregates, constituents, sources, elements, what arises from the ele ments, the impermanent, the permanent, conditioned phenomena, uncondi tioned phenomena, the appearing or the empty, samsara or nirvana. Thus, it  does not abide in the entity of any of those. It does not go into any of those.  Therefore, be in equipoise on it being free from elaboration and without in trinsic nature.  

Second, regarding speech, take the three seed syllables [Om ah hum] as the  object of observation. The vowels and consonants are expressed as speech in  accordance with thought, as well as the sixty branches of euphonious speech,  are without intrinsic nature, like the sound of an echo. Where does sound  come from? The throat, tongue, teeth, flesh, bones, bloods, the inside the body,  outside the body, in between, above or below? Where is it now? Then, where  does it go? Understand through analysis that it does not come from any of  those; it does not abide, and it does not go. Be in equipoise. 

MEDITATION ON EMPTINESS 541  

Third, take any of the hand implements, like the vajra, as the object of  observation. By analyzing their outside, inside, and in between, their big parts  and small parts, their top and bottom, shape, and color individually, none of  those is the vajra, and so forth. They are not naturally established by anything;  they are free of all elaborations; they have become like space. Therefore, be in  equipoise.  

Thus, the body, speech, and mind of the Tathagata are dependently arisen.  They are established as real when they are not analyzed. As entities of medi tative equipoise, which are analyzed with reasoning, they are not established  as the nature of anything at all; they are free from elaboration, passed beyond  being objects of speech or thought; they cannot be illustrated by anything; they  are free from all extremes. Understand all phenomena of samsara and nirvana  in the same way. The nature of everything is indivisible and of the same nature.  Therefore, when you understand that it is beyond adopting and discarding,  negation and proof, and all signs of apprehended and apprehender, subject and  object, understand that you have attained peace with regard to the profound  samsara and nirvana. Meditate until you have understood it in that way.  

It is of great importance to search for the person prior to meditating on the  selflessness of person; to search for something separate, such as form, prior to  meditating on the selflessness of phenomena; to search for the body of the  Tathagata prior to meditating on nirvana as without intrinsic nature; to inquire  into each of the objects of observation, to study them and, indeed, on the  occasion of observing with insight, to seek with scripture and reasoning to  prove, for each of the objects of observation, that reality is dependent arising  and the absence of intrinsic nature. Until you have the ascertainment that  decides on dependent arising, there is no opportunity to create the experience  of insight.  

[The section on the identification of emptiness is not translated here.]  

This instruction on the view of the equality of mundane existence and peace  has been put into letters by dPa' bo rdo rje in accordance with the words of  the venerable Manjughosa, adorned slightly with scripture and reasoning of  the pure Madhyamika tradition of the noble Nagarjuna and his son [Aryadeva]  and the glorious Candrakirti. All the scriptures of the Teacher are included in  the two, Sutra and Tantra. All the topics of Sutra are included in two stages.  All the topics of Tantra are included in two stages. In the system of Nagarjuna  and his son, the two - the ultimate explained from the perspective of the ex oteric perfections and the clear light explained from the perspective of the  esoteric secret mantra - are asserted to be the same. Therefore, I have faith  only in the system of Nagarjuna and his son and I follow Nagarjuna and his  son in their system of extracting the Buddha's intention from the Sutras and  Tantras as well. These instructions indeed set forth the very pure Madhyamika  view. However, the actual practice contains instructions on the clear light as  described in the Guhyasamaja Tantra. Therefore, in the section on quiescence, 

542 DONALD S. LOPEZ, JR.  

the method of cultivating samadhi based on the five lineages and four consorts  is unique to Tantra.  

NAMO SRI GURU MANJUGHOSAYA *  

I make supplication to the Conqueror Vajradhara, the protector of existence  and peace, who does not abide in existence or peace, who, through wisdom,  expels the bonds of existence and who, through compassion, casts the love of  his own peace far away.  

I supplicate the protector Manjughosa, body of wisdom concentrating into  one the limitless treasure of wisdom of the conquerors without number, ex ceeding the number of particles in a billion lands.  

I supplicate the feet of dPa' bo rdo rje, all of whose webs of doubt were  cleared away in direct perception by Manjughosa himself through the power  of great waves of prayers made long ago.  

I pray to be able to create faith and devotion effortlessly at all times by merely  calling to mind the kind lord, the root of all qualities of virtue and goodness,  mundane and supramundane.  

I pray to have little desire, to know satisfaction, to abide in peace and dis cipline, to seek liberation from my heart, to speak honestly, to act conscien tiously, to rely on superior companions, to create pure appearances impartially.  

I pray to remember that there is no time and that it is not just words to say  that death is definite and the time of death indefinite, to turn away completely  from attachment to fame and honor, to create a mind free of doubt.  

I pray to create compassion effortlessly by knowing all embodied beings as  kind mothers, to remember the sufferings of the weary, and turn away from  the wish for my happiness alone.  

I pray to understand, exactly as it is, the meaning of profound dependent  arising free from extremes, the single medicine removing all sickness of ex treme views, the intention of the supreme noble Nagarjuna and his son.  

With this virtue as an example, may all the roots of whatever virtue is created  by myself and others in the three times become causes only of unsurpassed  enlightenment and never fructify even for an instant as causes of what does  not agree with supreme enlightenment: profit, fame, retinue, resources, wealth,  and honor.  

May this pure prayer be realized by the power of the blessings of the con querors and their excellent children, by the incontrovertible truth of dependent  arising, and by my own pure intentions.  

This cluster of grain of achievements, a prayer to teachers of the dear lineage  of blessings, was written by the glorious bLo bzang grags pa of rGyal khams,  who has heard much, at O' de gung rgyal of Lha zhol, the king of snow moun tains in the snowy range. 
