+++
title = "31 Japanese Tantra, the Tachikawa-ryu, and Ryobu Shinto"

+++

Bernard Faure  

Scholars have often tried to define Buddhism through its theory of causality. The  Buddhist conception of karmic retribution, although derived from Brahmanic  thought, is usually presented as the most significant advance, not only over Brah manism but also over such other religious trends as Daoism and Confucianism,  which emphasized a system of cosmological connections based on "correlative  thinking." In this respect, it is significant that Tantric Buddhism also emphasized  cosmological connections rather than linear causality, and seems to have returned  to the Vedic conception of man as a microcosm. This macro-microcosmic con ception of the universe as emanating from a first principle is a major departure  from early Buddhism which, never overly concerned with cosmogony, instead  focused on ontogeny; that is, on the series of causes forming the so-called twelve linked chain - from ignorance to birth and death - leading to the emergence of  the individual.  

Tantra, an offshoot of the Vedic-Brahmanic and yogic traditions, is first of all  a system of correspondences between microcosm and macrocosm, man and the  universe. Whereas early Buddhism was defined by its ascetic world rejection and  its conception of man as an ultimately otherworldly being, Tantra may be defined  as its reintegration of the world into the soteriological path - since man and the  world are now fundamentally identical. By reintegrating the world into its prac 

tice, Tantra also reintegrated sexuality, one of the world's main driving forces.  Consequently, sexuality and fertility came to constitute basic elements of the  Tantric worldview. If the return to primordial unity remains the distant horizon  of this metaphysical teaching, Tantric practice is by contrast governed by a fun 

damental duality, usually defined in sexual terms. Thus, Tantra is in a true sense  a nondual dualism: whereas the theory emphasizes nondualism, the practice is  by and large characterized by dualism.  

Tantric Buddhism is therefore not, as some still believe, a degeneration of Bud-

544 BERNAR D FAUR E  

dhism caused by the deleterious influence of popular Indian culture. It is rather  a highly philosophical and ritual synthesis, a development of the notion of the  Two Truths (that is, ultimate and conventional truths). This feature accounts for  the fact that Tantric Buddhism was readily able to integrate another complex  cosmological system, the Chinese theory of yin and yang and of the five agents.  It is this synthesis, effected during the eighth and ninth centuries in China and  Japan, that became the core of Japanese Tantra. Japanese Tantra - or at least its  mainstream, redefined as "esoteric Buddhism" (mikkyo) - attempted to "purify"  itself of the sexual elements that characterized Indian Tantra; that is, to elude  sexuality and return to the strictly ascetic conception of early Buddhism. This  attempt was not entirely successful, however. In any case, it is important to see  that sexuality in Tantra is of an eminently cosmological and ritual nature. The  union of the male and female principles is seen as the source of all things, ex pressed in Tantric mythology as the sexual union of the god or buddha with his  female partner, who represents his energy (sakti).  

By becoming the main discourse of medieval Japanese ideology, Tantric Bud dhism contributed to the "Indianization" of Japan. Matters were, of course, more  complex, since in the meantime Japan had already integrated the principles of  Chinese cosmology. This integration took another step forward with the rise of  the Tachikawa-ryu. This branch of Shingon has been traced back to a priest named  Ninkan (fl. twelfth century). After being exiled to the town of Tachikawa (in Izu  province), Ninkan studied yin-yang cosmology (onmyodo) and incorporated cos mological elements into Shingon doctrine. His teaching soon flourished, and,  according to tradition, was systematized by Raiyu (1126-1304). However, the  Tachikawa-ryu was eventually declared to be "heretical." The reasons alleged were  essentially doctrinal, having to do with the "immoral" elements in the Tachikawa  teachings. This led to the interdiction of the Tachikawa-ryu and to the destruc tions of its scriptures, at the end of the Muromachi period. Nevertheless, Tachi kawa ideas, which in some respects were a resurgence of Indian Tantra, continued  to influence Buddhist discourse and even provided significant components for  the late medieval and early modern worldview.  

In India, Tantric Buddhism had already assimilated local Hindu gods into its  pantheon. This synthesis was so successful that Buddhism, losing its sharp dis tinctive features, was eventually reabsorbed into the fold of Hinduism. On the  contrary, in Japan, a similar synthesis triggered a reaction and led to the emer gence of a distinctly "Japanese" religion named Shinto. This tradition, which  emerged in centers like Ise Shrine, finds its origins in a particular brand of Jap anese Tantra, the so-called Ryobu Shinto. This new ideology, according to which  Shinto deities were the local manifestations of "original" buddhas, led, for in stance, to the identification of the sun goddess Amaterasu with the buddha Vai rocana (Dainichi, "Great Sun" in Japanese), and of the two shrines of Ise with the  two great mandalas of Shingon (the Womb realm and Vajra realm mandalas).  These two mandalas were used in the Tachikawa-ryu as symbols of sexual polarity,  the Tachikawa influence being very strong in this Tantric Ise tradition. 

JAPANESE TANTRA 54 5  

This "nondual dualism" is illustrated in such works as the Ise denki, or, to give  its full (and rather enigmatic) title, the Ise shosho Nihongi yushiki honsho nin denki  (Transmitted Record of the Nihongi, of the Consciousness, Fundamental Nature,  and Humanity, produced by I-Se). According to its colophon, this work was  copied in 1537 at the Myoo-in, a temple near Ise, after being transmitted by the  priest Sonkai (1472-1543) to his disciple Ryokan. The Ise denki is divided into  ten sections, which treat of various aspects of the esoteric Buddhist tradition with  regard to Ise. Here we will present the first three sections, describing the main  phases of the cosmic emanation process - which are also, in reverse order, those  of the soteriological process. Even so, it will be difficult to provide a simple idea  of the text's intricate symbolism, encoded in multple layers of meanings that  appear at first blush to be mere repetitions of numerical symbols (sets of polarities,  triads, and pentads). On closer examination, the text describes a mandala, that  is, in a dynamic form, the cosmogonic or psychogenic process of emanation (and  resorption). The following is but a preliminary attempt to decode some of these  meanings.  

The name Ise is interpreted here in a very idiosyncratic fashion, typical of  medieval exegesis. The two graphemes (Sino-Japanese characters) of this com pound are used to symbolize the fundamental polarity out of which everything  arises. Thus, "I" and "Se" become the Tantric and Shinto equivalents of the Chi nese yin and yang. They are also symbols of (and symbolized by) the two great  Shingon mandates. In other Ryobu Shinto texts, the two principles of yin and  yang (and the two mandalas) are associated with the two primordial Shinto deities  Izanami and Izanagi, whose lovemaking brought about a Genesis of sorts. This is  why, in the following translation, I will read the term as I-Se, to emphasize that  it is the cosmological polarity, more than the geographical toponym in the Kii  peninsula, that is being referenced.  

1. ON THE HARMONIOUS UNION OF HEAVEN AND EARTH OF I-SE  

In the so-called harmonious union of Heaven and Earth of I-Se tradition, beings  are the flower, earth is the tathagata Vairocana of the two Womb and Vajra  realms; and beings are the fundamentally unborn calyx of the letter a. Thus, it  is written: "If your own mind is pure, all the buddhas dwell in it; when the  mind with a single voice recollects the letter a, all the buddhas constantly  preach the Law." The letter a in question is none other than the two characters  I-Se, and it is the origin of man and woman. This is why it is said in the esoteric  teaching: "All beings have in their chest a letter a, whose sequence is as follows:  within the lotus appears the moon disk; and within the moon disk appears the  letter a, which transforms into five colors: blue, red, yellow, white, and black."  Under this letter a is a three-pronged vajra, representing the six sense faculties  of beings. It is also said that the two buddhas and the four bodhisattvas dwell  there, sharing the six kinds of ritual implements. . . . Thus, the one-pronged 

546 BERNAR D FAURE  

vajra is the stem of the lotus flower; it is the body of all beings. The five-pronged  vajra is the root of the lotus flower; it is the right and left feet of beings. The  three-pronged vajra is the petals of the lotus flower; it is the right and left arms  of beings.  

In I-Se, we find the gate of the letter a, the first of the forty-two letters. The  five-pronged vajra is the great earth of the Dharma realm; it is called the "Palace  of Suchness." The three-pronged vajra is the unborn principle and wisdom  inside the mind; it is the retribution earth of the retribution body. The one 

pronged vajra is the essence of the principle outside the body; it is the won derful domain of ultimate reality.  

It is also said: "The letter a is the bodily karma of the dharma body; the  moon disk is the verbal karma of the retribution body; the lotus is the mental  karma of the metamorphosis body." These three bodies of the fundamental  essence of the three periods are also symbolized as follows: the one-pronged  vajra is the bodily karma of dharma body; the three-pronged vajra is the verbal  karma of the retribution body; the five-pronged vajra is the mental karma of  the metamorphosis body. When above and below unite harmoniously, one  speaks of the dharma body of the six great elements. All classes of beings  without exception are endowed with this nature. Thus, in the interval of the  unconditioned sound, the phoneme a arises and the fruits of buddhahood are  perfected. If one knows and realizes this letter a, even the four serious offences  and the five transgressions turn into the merits of the mandala. If one cultivates  this letter, the three poisons - ignorance, greed, and hatred - are transmuted  into the secret practices of yoga.  

The "harmonious union of heaven and earth" is the union of I-Se. "I" is the  tathagata Vairocana of the Womb realm; "Se" the tathagata Vairocana of the  Vajra realm. It is also said: "When one consider the origins of the letter a, it is  the tathagata Vairocana of the Womb realm; it is heaven. It is none other than  I-Se. With the letter ba (va in Sanskrit), again: it is the tathagata Vairocana of  the Vajra realm, the earth; it is also I-Se. If one divides the human body into  five sections, the top of the head corresponds to the realm of the buddhas; the  right arm to that of the bodhisattvas; the left arm to that of the pratyekabud dhas; the right leg to that of the devas; the left leg to that of the sravakas. When  one thus unites the heaven and earth of I-Se, the letter is on the tip of each of  the fingers of the four hands and each of the toes of the four feet. These letters  correspond to the bodhisattvas of the forty-two stages. The two highest stages  are those of the two buddhas of I-Se, who are are man and woman. The man's  stage is always that of a buddha body. Man is ruled by heaven, woman by the  earth. This is what is called the union of heaven and earth. The seed-letters  born from "I" are red; those born from "Se" are white. . . . This is called the  harmonious union of heaven and earth, of the two Womb and Vajra realms.  

Because Indian metaphysics takes the Word or Speech (vac) to be the ultimate  principle, we need first to explain briefly Indian conceptions regarding language.JAPANES E TANTR A 547  

Most significant in this respect are the forty-nine or fifty phonemes of the Sanskrit  phonetic system, called matrkas or "little Mothers" because they are seen as the  source of all sounds - hence of all things. Incidentally, these phonemes served as  model for the Japanese kana syllabary, attributed to Kukai (774-835), the founder  of Shingon. There is another arrangement of forty-two phonemes, called a-ra-pa 

ca-na after the sequence of its five first phonemes. It is this arrangement that is  mentioned here in association with the forty-two stages of the bodhisattva's career.  In both cases, the first of these phonemes is the syllable a, which came to take  on mystical values, not only as the symbol of all beginnings but also as constitutive  of all other syllables; and furthermore, as the marker of the negative (as in English  and French, two other Indo-European languages). This phoneme thus came to  express the ultimate principle, from which everything emanates. As a vowel, a is  also the first of the sixteen vowels of the Sanskrit "garland of letters," which  includes m (the anusvara or bindu) and h (the visarga), two phonemes said to  give birth to the series of consonants, from ka to ha. If this vocalic-consonantal  sequence is perceived in cosmogonic terms as symbolizing the emanation process,  the reverse sequence indicates the resorption process, which is that taken by the  Tantric practitioner who is intent on returning to its source. This is why our text  emphasizes the uttering of the single sound: this inarticulate sound is the nada,  the primal manifestation of the absolute, the knowledge of which is tantamount  to deliverance. This is the sound that corresponds to the phoneme m, the bindu  ("dot" or "drop"), marked graphically by a dot above the syllable. This bindu is  a "drop" of phonic but also photic, or luminous, energy, that is temporarily col lected before again dividing itself to create the multiplicity of consonants and the  totality of things. This nasal resonance is said to be born from the union of the  god and his Sakti, an idea expressed graphically by two bindus, red and white,  fusing to form a "mixed bindu." The bindu, in short, is the point of convergence  and expansion; it symbolizes, therefore it is, the Absolute; or rather, it represents  the point of contact with the source of energy. Hence the importance of mantras,  and their magical but also cosmogonic efficacy, uniting sound and breath, and  the cosmic and human planes.  

To summarize: from the phonetic standpoint, the energy of sound, born from  the sexual union of the god and his consort, first creates the sixteen vowels, before  concentrating into the bindu, and then disseminating, through the visarga (graph ically represented as two bindus) into the consonants. In cosmogonic terms, the  initial duality first expands, forming a first level; then concentrates into a drop,  which subdivides into three or five elements to form a second level, before further  engendering the multiplicity of things. From the standpoint of generic Tantric  meditation, this may be visualized as the generation of three mandalas: the prac titioner first visualizes the god and his Sakti in sexual union. This vision merges  into a single point of pure light (the bindu), from which another mandala arises,  divided into five colored sectors. At the center is an eight-petaled lotus, which  serves as a dais for the god, from whom emerge the four deities of the cardinal  directions, who in turn produce the four subordinate deities of the four inter-

548 BERNAR D FAURE  

mediate directions. The practitioner then visualizes another mandala, the jewel  palace, representing the human world, at the center of which the god and his  consort are engaged in sexual union, surrounded by lesser deities.  

This dynamic may also be expressed in terms of the mantra Om (a-hum, in  Japanese a-un). Here again, the emanation process starts with a duality, or rather  the union of two principles, and resorbs into unity with the "adornment" of the  bindu. For reasons that have little to do with phonetics, the two phonemes and  the bindu, a-u-n, are replaced in the Ise denki by the two ideograms I-Se. The  "harmonious union" of these two principles is not only phonetic but also sexual,  and indeed the sexual metaphor pervades our text, giving some credibility to the  claim that Tachikawa rituals involved sexual intercourse between the priest and  his female partner. Whatever the case, the phoneme a is said to change into five  phases (and five colors), giving rise to a fivefold symbolism that is another leit motiv of this text. These "five as" (called the "five turns" or the "five dots" of  the a, because they are expressed graphically by dots) are: the short a, the long  a (a), the bindu (am), the visarga (ah), and finally the synthesis of all these: ahm  (or ah).  

The phoneme a is also said to be "the jade gate" of a woman; that is, her vulva,  the source of all buddhas and human beings. As we will see, the female womb is  assimilated to the ultimate principle, the primordial chaos, before the emergence  of the buddhas and of the world. This image is reminiscent of Courbet's famous  painting of a woman's vulva, entitled "The Origin of the World." In Japanese  Tantra, this letter a, as ultimate principle, is also the cosmic buddha Vairocana,  represented at the center of the mandala (or cosmic realm) that emanates from  him. In Indian Tantra, the deity is often represented in cosmic union with his  sakti (or female energy), whereas in Japanese Tantra this element is often down played (it is implied, however, in the fact that Vairocana is androgynous). This  conception of the deity as a polarized (and sexualized) couple, masculine and  feminine, is the central characteristic of Tantra. Here, the reference to the "two  buddhas of I-Se" in the context of sexual union is more in line with the Indian  conception.  

Whereas Indian culture favors orality, Chinese and Japanese cultures emphasize  the written letter - as shown by this text. Thus, the grapheme a (together with  its phoneme) comes to play an important role in the Shingon meditation known  as "Aji-kan" (contemplation of the grapheme a). In this meditation, the practi 

tioner is told to visualize the clear white disk of the full moon, and in this disk  the letter a (written in a particular script known as Siddham) on a lotus. This  visualization is a dynamic creation process, the creation of a mental mandala from  the central buddha Vairocana, through the four buddhas of the cardinal directions  (in the sequence E, S, W, N) and the four bodhisattvas of the ordinal directions  (SE, SW, NW, NE), down to the peripheral deities and the multiplicity of sentient  beings. Our text merely alludes to the principal phases of this process, as they  are visualized - that is, enacted - by the practitioner. But here, instead of the  emanation process - from unity to multiplicity - we are dealing with a resorption 

JAPANES E TANTR A 549  

process in three phases - from multiplicity (symbolized by the lotus and its pet als), through oneness (symbolized by the moon disk), to the ultimate principle  (the letter a). The basic schema - simply alluded to here, but more explicit in  Indian sources - remains the same: the energy of the two principles is first re sorbed into one point (bindu), before evolving into a pentad, from which multi plicity evolves. In the embryological terms of section 3, the drops (red and white)  of mother and father unite to form a bindu, which evolves into a formed embryo  possessed of five limbs; the subsequent birth of this pentadic being marks the  emergence of another level of reality or consciousness: the creation of a new  world, the "jeweled palace," which the Ise denki calls the "Palace [or Capital] of  Suchness."  

The phases of emanation are often described as being three or five in number.  The three phases are here described in terms of the three most common types of  vajras, a ritual instrument used in Shingon ritual. The number of prongs of the  vajra (one, three, or five) lends itself to all kinds of symbolism. This is particularly  true of the five-pronged vajra, called the "human-shaped vajra" owing to its vague  resemblance to the human body. Our texts manipulate these numerical categories  ad nauseam, in order to reinforce the equivalence between macrocosm (the uni 

verse) and microcosm (the human body). Here, the three types of vajras first  correspond to the three parts of the lotus (the stem, the root, and the petals), as  well as to the three sections of the human body (the head and torso, the legs, and  the arms). They also represent the three types of karmic retribution caused by  acts of the mouth, body, and mind. Thus, reaching the level of the letter a means  returning to the source of everything, the stage before anything whatsoever arises;  and it cancels all the evil karma one may have accumulated in the past. Likewise,  the three symbols of the lotus, the moon, and the letter a correspond to the three  bodies of the Buddha, from its most down-to-earth form, the metamorphosis body  (nirmana-kaya) to the most absolute, the dharma body (dharma-kaya) - with both  relative and absolute being mediated by the retribution body (sambhoga-kdya),  seen only by beings who have acquired merits through practice.  

The text mentions six buddhas; that is, the two buddhas of I-Se and the four  buddhas of the cardinal directions. Here, as in Indian Tantra, Vairocana is rep resented as a divine polarity. These six buddhas, symbolizing the six elements of  Shingon Buddhism, are also represented by ritual instruments, namely, two sets  of three vajras, symbolizing, respectively, the microcosm (the human body) and  macrocosm. These three vajras also represent the three levels of reality, the three  mandalas: the five-pronged vajra symbolizes the pentadic human world (the "Pal ace of Suchness"); the three-pronged vajra the intermediary level of the duality  of the two principles; and the one-pronged vajra the ultimate reality. Thus, the  sequence from five-pronged to three-pronged to one-pronged vajra represents the  cosmic resorption from pentadic reality to duality to unity, as experienced sym bolically by the practitioner. Again, the two series of three bodies symbolized by  the three symbols (the letter a, the moon disk, and the lotus on the one hand;  and the three types of vajra on the other) represent the bodies of the buddha 

550 BERNAR D FAUR E  

Vairocana and of sentient beings, whose "harmonious fusion" constitutes the  "dharma body made of the six elements" - that is, the body of the enlightened  being, or of the embryo in the mother's womb.  

Recall that the process of emanation begins with the sexual union of the two  polar opposites, the male deity and his female sakti (energy) or, in Ryobu Shinto  terms, the "I" and "Se" of Ise (the character se, not so incidentally, happens to  mean "energy"). This union is presented in Chinese cosmological terms as a union  of heaven and earth, of yin and yang. In Tantric terms, the emanation process is  first a phonetic one, from the first to the last of the forty-two phonemes of the a 

ra-pa-ca-na sequence. In the translated passage, the first two letters a and va (or  vara with the bindu) symbolize the "two buddhas of I-Se," that is, Vairocana in  his two aspects, in the Womb and Vajra realms. The remaining forty letters are  associated (and written on) the twenty fingers and toes, realizing a microcosmic/  phonetic body, as well as the soteriological path of the bodhisattva's career, with  its forty-two stages. These letters are said to be either female or male, arising from  the female principle ("I") or the male principle ("Se"). Their respective colors, red  and white, refer to the Indian (and Sino-Japanese) belief that the human embryo  is formed by the union of the blood of the mother and the semen of the father.  The two letters a and va are also the first of the sequence a/va/ra/ha/ka, repre senting the syllables of the five elements (earth, water, fire, wind, space).  

2. ON THE EIGHT-PETALED LOTUS OF I-SE  

The "eight-petaled lotus" is the great earth of the dharma realm of the har monious union of the two Womb and Vajra sections. The above-mentioned  "harmonious union" of the two male and female bodies, with their four arms  and four feet, is this "eight-petaled lotus." It is the source of all things. Thus,  "capital of the suchness of innate awakening" refers to the gate of the letter a,  the first of the forty-two letters. One also calls this the making of the Tathagata.  The two dharmas of consciousness and body are called "unborn." The Dharma  gate of the two truths, conventional and ultimate, means that all things under  heaven are the body of the Buddha; everything contains this lotus. You must  inquire well into this and realize its truth. Without the ultimate reality of the  suchness of ultimate and conventional truths, in which concentration and wis 

dom are harmoniously united, nothing could come to life. Like the forms of  the seeds of the five wheels, the Buddha's mind sustains the sweet and won drous practices of the Three Secrets. All the actions of sentient beings, without  exception, are contained in the sound of the wisdom of ultimate reality. What  a pity! Failing to realize this from lack of wisdom we are born in this world,  and in the end we die, having forgotten the great merits of innate awakening.  It is a shame not to have realized I-Se until now. The resonance of the voice  at the moment of birth, all this is the suchness of I-Se. This is why it is said in 

JAPANES E TANTR A 551  

the scripture: "The actions truly manifested by all beings, the awakening re alized by the buddhas, the wondrous and subtle practices: all of these have to  be like what the Buddha spoke." It is also said: "He explained that verbal char acteristics, words and speech, are all mantras; corporeal characteristics, actions  and movements, all are secret seals (mudras); mental characteristics, thoughts,  all are secret contemplation." This is why, when sentient beings are born, the  eight-petaled lotus of the mind/heart is the great earth of the fundamentally  unborn letter a. When one is born, one expresses through words the wondrous  practice of I-Se; when one dies, too, one returns to the great earth of the such ness of innate awakening. "Fundamentally unborn" means that one must re alize the principle, for a long time constantly playing on the terrace of the  secret words; "to obtain the wondrous practice of Sha-na" simply means that  one must become the mind described in this teaching. The eight petals are the  letter a, and this letter a is the jade gate of woman.  

In this second section, the symbolism of the lotus is brought to the forefront.  The eight-petaled lotus in question is that found at the center of the Womb  realm mandala. It represents the emanation process of the world, but also, in  human terms, sexual union - and the Tachikawa-ryu did in fact graphically  represent a man and woman making love on a giant lotus as an expression of  its ultimate secret. This lotus also represents the mother's womb, the source  of all beings, whence the phoneme a. It finally expresses, in ontogenic terms,  the mind/heart of the embryo, from which various types of consciousness arise.  The sexual union is further expressed by various polarities such as conscious ness and body, ultimate and conventional truth, or concentration and wis 

dom - the two main elements of Buddhist practice. One such polarity seems  to imply a play on words on the expression sha-na, which is an abbreviation  for Vairocana, but also a reference to the two Chinese demonstrative pronouns:  the "this" and "that" that symbolize duality.  

Here again, we have an emphasis on the identity between the microcosm  and the macrocosm, between the various phenomena and the cosmic buddha  Vairocana. This identity is expressed in terms of the five wheels (cakras) of the  Indian tradition, or of the "three secrets" of the Shingon tradition. The primal  cry of the child at birth is said to be the primordial name of I-Se. In other  sources, the two phonemes a-un (or a-a, ha-ha) are the orgasmic sounds uttered  at the peak of sexual union. Not only these sounds, but all others, are seen (or  heard) as mantras; that is, as expressions of ultimate reality, as the voice of the  cosmic Buddha. Likewise, all gestures are mudras, symbolic gestures, gestures  of Vairocana; and all thoughts are Vairocana's contemplation. In the Shingon  tradition, these represent the "three mysteries" of speech, body, and mind.  Thus, this section illustrates the reintegration of the world into the soteriolog ical path. 

552 BERNARD FAURE  3. METHOD OF INITIAL COMPLETION OF I-SE  

The first stage is illustrated by a circle, in which are written two letter a's in  Siddham script, above two Sino-Jap»nese characters meaning red and white;  and, at the center, Mind and Lewdness.  

The essence and flesh of the mother, symbolizing the Womb realm (eastern  direction), represent the mind of one suchness of the harmonious union of I Se. The essence and bones of the father, symbolizing the Vajra realm, are the  virtue of energy of the harmonious union of heaven and earth. This is the  essence of the five limbs [according to the I-Se teaching]; it is the primordial  body, the seed-syllable ran, the beginning of the passions of greed and love,  when father and mother have intercourse, and the two drops, red and white,  unite harmoniously. The red letter a is the efficiency of the mother's emission;  it is the seed-letter that constitutes the flesh of beings. The white letter a is the  breath of the father's emission; it is what constitutes the bones of beings. These  two letter a's, red and white, are the universal body of the Vairocana of the  two Womb and Vajra realms; they constitute a buddha body in which causes  and effects are constantly abiding. This is why the Vairocana of the two realms  as well as the five hundred Worthies and the seven hundred Worthies are  enshrined in the body of beings. This awakening of I-Se means to become a  buddha in this very body.  

The second stage is illustrated graphically by a kind of vessel with two horns, in  which are inscribed the letters a and ban.  

It corresponds to the tathagata Ratnasambhava. It is called Wisdom of the Equal  nature. It is the buddha of the south, the gate of practice. In two seven-day  periods, the embryo's body become like this. It is called "three-pronged vajra."  Its right and left extremities are the Vairocana of the two Womb and Vajra  sections. Its seed is called abudon. The two red and white colors merge. It is  the stage of the two moons.  

The third stage is illustrated by a kind of trident, in which are inscribed the letters  a, ban, un.  

It corresponds to the buddha Aksobhya of the western direction. It is called  Wisdom of Wondrous Contemplation. It is the bodhisattva gate. It is the stage  called pesi. After three seven-day periods, the body thus has the shape of a  three-pronged vajra. The bones harden, and on each side two arms appear. The  three-pronged vajra shape symbolizes the three secrets; it is also the three  bodhisattvas, the three bodies, and the form of the three-petaled lotus. "Three  seven-day periods" means that, in the matter of harmonious union, one spends  three months in the womb; thus it is called "three sevens." The soul is now 

JAPANESE TANTRA 55 3  

present and active: this is when the divine power of I-Se begins. This is the  initial stage of awakening.  

The fourth stage is symbolized by a five-wheel stupa, inscribed with the five  Siddham letters a, ha, ra, ha, kha in ascending order.  

This shape represents the Buddha Sakyamuni of the northern direction. [As  wisdom,] it is called Wisdom of the Perfection of Action. It is also what one  calls the nirvana gate. It is the stage called ghana. In the fourth seven-day  period, the embryo already has a body like this. This shape is the tathagata of  innate awakening, the body which produces the wisdom of the buddhas of the  five sections. The four Confucian virtues - humanity, righteousness, propriety,  and wisdom - also correspond to this.  

The fifth stage is illustrated by a small buddha, with two letter a's in Siddham  script, above two Sino-Japanese characters meaning red and white.  

This stage is that of the buddha Vairocana at the center. It is the wisdom of  the nature of the dharmadhatu body. It is the buddha with the ten thousand  perfected merits. It is the stage called bano bonga. During the fifth seven-day  period, such a body is formed. This form is the perfectly completed body of  the effects of buddhahood. By focusing one's contemplation on the bodhisattva  who aspires upward, one comes to dwell in the unconditioned, where one no  longer knows even the beginningless self. However, as a result of the contem plation of the bodhisattva going downward to convert beings, one becomes a  buddha endowed with the ten thousand practices, according to the right prin 

ciple of I-Se.  

The fifth seven-day period is the fifth month. It represents the totality of the  nine months. The number of days now exceeds 38 days, and when 275 days  have elapsed, birth takes place. In this, there are differences, based on the  poverty or wealth of that person. When nine months have been spent in the  womb, nine full moons disks have appeared, and one leaves the fundamental  nature of I-Se.  

"Becoming a buddha in this very body" (sokushin jobutsu) is a fundamental con ception of Tantric Buddhism, popularized in Japan by Kukai. After describing in  symbolic terms the sexual union that is the source of both the cosmogonic and  the ontogenic processes, the text proceeds to describe the transition from duality  to multiplicity as a process of embryonic gestation in five stages. The five gestation  stages in Indian medicine are kalalam (gararan in Japanese), arbudam (abudon in  Japanese), pesi (heishi in Japanese), ghana (kennan in Japanese), and prasakha  (harashakya in Japanese): these correspond to five periods of seven days each,  after which the embryo is said to be completely formed. According to Indian (as  well as Chinese and Japanese) embryology, the flesh of the embryo comes from 

554 BERNARD FAURE  

the mother, and the bones from the father. The two elements (blood and semen)  are here represented graphically by two letter a's, one red, the other white, sym bolizing the two mandalas, the two realms of reality. The Womb realm corre sponds to the mother (blood, the flesh, the red letter a), the truth of Suchness;  whereas the Vajra realm corresponds to the father (semen, bones, the white letter  a), to energy. Note here the inversion from Indian Tantra, in which the male  element - the god - is the unmoving principle, whereas the female element - the goddess, his Sakti - symbolizes his energy.  

This embryo is, literally, a "buddha in this very body" - and the five stages  correspond to the five "wheels" (cakras) and the five elements that constitute the  body of the cosmic buddha Vairocana, as well as of all beings. Childbirth was  traditionally perceived negatively as a fall into the world of suffering, produced  by karmic retribution - and the second part of the text will develop this notion.  But in the first part, the gestation process and the birth that ensues are sanctified  as a process of awakening, and they are those of the bodhisattva who, instead of  wishing to rise toward nirvana, decides in his compassion to be reborn in this  world, in order to save sentient beings. To illustrate that this gestation process is  also a process of awakening, the five embryonic stages are identified with the five  gates of Buddhist practice (production of the thought of awakening, cultivation  of practice, bodhi, nirvana, and upaya or skillful means), the five directions (east,  south, west, north, and the center), and the five buddhas.  

Vairocana, endowed with the five buddha wisdoms, is the beginning and end  of this process. As we saw earlier in the vajra symbolism of the human body, each  stage is now symbolized by a different type of vajra. Thus, the human embryo is  none other than Vairocana. But just as the five buddhas first emanate from Vai 

rocana, so too, when this body becomes differentiated, the five buddhas first  appear at each stage of its gestation. The gestation process is thus a sort of tem poral mandala. Out of these buddhas and their wisdoms, the entire world will  appear, and this is tantamount to the birth of the child, the creation of another  mandala. These five stages are sometimes followed by others, but usually the  remainder of the gestation process is implied. Sometimes the nine months are  represented by the phases of the moon, illustrated by nine superimposed moon  

disks - an echo of the cakras of the subtle body of human beings.  Thus, the new human being is the perfect Vairocana, the coming together of  the Womb and Vajra realms, of the two mandalas. In this body reside all the  gods - that is, all the energies - of the universe. It is a divine body, a perfect  microcosm. The idea was already found in such Hindu texts as the Upanisads,  according to which "the gods dwell in the body, like cows in a stable." This  equivalence of the body of Vairocana with that of sentient beings is also achieved  ritually through the practice of nyasa, "imposition." Nyasa is the cosmologization  or divinization of the body (or of an object), which is effected by touching its  various parts, depositing the corresponding deities or energies in them, and "seal ing" them with appropriate mudras (symbolic gestures). Through these macro and microcosmic correlations, which allow for the superimposition of a cosmic 

JAPANESE TANTRA 555  

diagram on the grid of the body, man is cosmicized, while the cosmos is divinized  (and ultimately, humanized). Man becomes a universe in expansion (and resorp tion), that is, a living mandala.  

The five wheels (cakras) or elements (earth, water, fire, wind, space) are sym bolized by the five seed-syllables (byas): a, va, ra, ha, kha. The practitioner con templates these five wheels and their bijas on his own body: the section below  the hips corresponds to the earth wheel, and its seed-syllable is a; the navel  corresponds to the water wheel (va); the heart to the fire wheel (ra); the space  between the eyebrows to the wind wheel (ha); the top of the head - and the  twelve-inch space above it - to the space wheel (kha). Thus he becomes Vairo cana. These five wheels or elements evolved in ancient India as a combination of  the five shapes of the Vedic fire altar (square, circle, triangle, half-moon, dump ling), the five colors (yellow, white, red, blue, black), and the five cakras and  sections of the human body, according to the spiritual physiology of yoga.  

Tantric Buddhism recognizes not only five elements, but six; the sixth element,  represented by the seed-syllable vam, is consciousness. Kukai was apparently the  first to assert that the six elements are the permanent, nonborn realities of the  Dharma realm (and no longer simply the composite, impermanent elements of  the phenomenal world). In the Vajra realm, the five wheels are formed by the  turning of the letter va, whereas in the Womb realm they are formed by that of  the letter a. In both realms, they are also formed or symbolized by the a, va, ra,  ha, kha sequence. In the Mahavairocanasutra, one of the principal scriptural au thorities of East Asian Tantra, we already find the five great elements associated  with the five shapes and the five seed-syllables (a vam, ram, ham, kham). This  synthesis allowed for the development of the five-wheel stupa (gorinto in Japa 

nese). In this stupa, which is unique to Japanese Tantra, the seed-syllables a, va,  ra, ha, kha are inscribed on the front of each element (the five building blocks of  different shapes of the stupa), whereas vam (consciousness), placed on the back,  pervades all five elements.  

The embryo, once fully formed with its five limbs, is an eminently pentadic  being. Because, according to Buddhist notions of transmigration, its gestation  takes place in the liminal phase between a previous life/death and a subsequent  rebirth, it came to be assimilated to the early Buddhist notion of "intermediary  being" (antarabhava), the paradoxical entity surviving after death to form a link  with the next life - whence, perhaps, the association with such a prominent fu 

nerary symbol as the stupa. Whereas the fivefold gestation process served to  emphasize the temporal aspect of cosmogonic emanation, the five-wheel stupa  served as a convenient mnemonic device for summarizing the structural relation ships betwen various elements of reality - at the pentadic stage of its emanation.  

The five-wheel stupa is described in the fourth section of the he denki in terms  of the grapheme a, whose five constitutive elements (brush strokes) are used to  illustrate various pentadic series (the five buddhas, the five directions, the five  aggregates of personality, and so forth). This equivalence is also represented di 

agrammatically at the end of the text. Other sections elaborate specific points. 

556 BERNARD FAURE  

Section 5, which marks the beginning of the second part, discusses the impurity  of the human body. Now described in more physiological terms, it is no longer  the "subtle body" of yogic physiology but rather the mortal body, made of flesh  and bones, bound for the cemetery. However, the microcosmic interpretation is  not entirely absent, since its twelve great bones and 354 small bones are said to  represent the twelve months and 354 days of the lunar year. But we are now in  the realm of conventional truth, and the text itself emphasizes its use of the Two  Truths theory when it refers to the twofold gate of purity and impurity. Section  7 discusses the ultimate principle of I-Se, the suchness to be realized by buddhas  and sentient beings alike. It emphasizes the identity beween buddhas, kamis, and  humans; or, in more Confucian terms, between buddhahood and "humanity."  Section 8 is an explanation of ultimate awakening (sambodhi) in terms of the three  Sino-Japanese characters that form the name of the buddha Amida. Its identifi cation of these characters with the three bodies of the cosmic buddha Vairocana  suggests an influence from the work of the Shingon reformer Kakuban (1095- 1143), who identified Vairocana and Amitabha (Amida). Section 9 deals with the  "eight sufferings" of the human body (birth, old age, and so on), and describes  human life in rather grim terms. These sufferings, however, can be voided when  one realizes the ultimate truth of the mantra of I-Se. Section 10 concerns "em powerment" (adhisthana in Sanskrit; kaji in Japanese), the ritual through which  humans are metamorphosed into buddhas, merging the two great mandalas  within their own body. Such mystical/sexual union of the androgynous practi tioner is what one calls "becoming a buddha in this very body." Once this is  achieved, nothing more needs to - or can - be said.  

The Ise shosho Nihongi yushiki honsho nin denki passage translated above is taken  from the following published edition: Shinto taikei: Ronsetsu-hen 2, Shingon shinto  2, edited by Shinto taikei hensankai (Tokyo: Shinto taikei hensankai, 1992), pp.  555-77.  

Further Reading  

Additional sources on Japanese Tantra and the Tachikawa-ryu include Bernard  Faure, The Red Thread: Buddhist Approaches to Sexuality (Princeton: Princeton Uni versity Press, 1998); Michel Strickmann, Mantras et mandarins: Le bouddhisme  tantrique en Chine (Paris: Gallimard, 1996); Susan Blakeley Klein, "Allegories of  Desire: Poetry and Eroticism in Ise Monogatari Zuino" Monumenta Nipponica 52.4  (1997): 441-65; James H. Sanford, "Wind, Waters, Stupas, Mandalas: Fetal Bud dhahood in Shingon," Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 21.1-2 (1997): 1-38;  and Sanford, "The Abominable Tachikawa Skull Ritual," Monumenta Nipponica  46.1 (Spring 1991), pp. 1-15.
