+++
title = "35 Jain Tantra: Divinatory and Meditative Practices in the Twelfth-Century Yogasastra of Hemacandra"

+++

Olle Qvarnstrom  

The study of Jain medieval Sanskrit texts reveals a Tantric influence on the two  main traditions of Jainism - Digambara and Svetambara - both in the sense of  ideas and practices and in the sense of a literary class. This influence was restricted  neither geographically nor confessionally, and manifested itself within different  literary genres and contexts. Its impression is also visible in iconography and art.  

The questions of the precise extent to which Tantra penetrated into Jainism,  the historical development of Jain Tantra, and its indebtedness to Hindu and  Buddhist Tantra are at the present stage of research not entirely clear, even though  their outlines have been sketched by scholars such as John Cort and Paul Dundas.  Many Tantric texts are still only available in manuscript form. Few have been  critically edited. For various reasons Jain Tantra has not caught the attention of  Indologists. This has in its turn made it difficult to integrate Jain Tantra into a  broader religious, cultural, and historical framework, as well as to define its dis tinctive character.  

Rather than attempting to give a historical survey of Jain Tantra, the following  study is, therefore, based on a single text: the Yogasastra of Hemacandra (1089- 1172 C.E.). This, the most comprehensive treatise on Svetambara Jainism that has  come down to us, was regarded as a normative account of that tradition even by  

non-Jains. Today it serves as a handbook for the Svetambara community in Gu jarat as well as among their coreligionists in East Africa, Great Britain, and North  America.  

Even though the Yogasastra is neither a Tantric text nor an historical work that  might provide us with a description of the gradual infusion of Tantra into Sve tambara Jainism and its ideological provenance, it is the result of a historical  process during which the incorporation of Tantric ideas and practices was natural 

596 OLLE QVARNSTRO M  

and necessary. The Yogasastra is thus valuable for uncovering the Tantric influence  on medieval and contemporary Svetambara Jainism, since it informs us of the  means and extent of Tantric influence on mainstream Svetambara Jainism. At the  same time, we have to be on our guard for doctrinal elements that do not nec 

essarily reflect the view of either the Jain congregation or the leading circles within  the exegetical tradition, but which are merely the predilections and hidden mo tives of the author himself. This is especially important with regard to the Yoga sastra, since it was written at the request of the author's employer, King Kumar apala, who reigned over Gujarat during this time and who was himself in the  process of converting from Saivism to Jainism. One may therefore assume that  the motive behind the composition of the Yogasastra was in part apologetic and  propagandistic, and that it was linguistically and doctrinally designed to serve the  purpose of converting Gujarati Saivites to Jainism, as well as to propagate a co herent creed among the Jains themselves. As an erudite writer of elegant verse,  Hemacandra was well equipped for such a task. This is confirmed by posterity,  even if, for political and religious reasons, the spread and development of Jainism  during this time and in this part of India had its limitations.  

In the first four chapters of the Yogasastra, Hemacandra, like many of his pre decessors, structures what he perceives as Jain orthopraxy and orthodoxy into  three main categories or "jewels" (ratnatraya): correct faith (darsana), knowledge  (jnana), and conduct (caritra). These are also designated "yoga," a term that is  therefore synonymous with Jainism, which explains the title of the work: Yoga sastra or "Handbook on Jainism."  

The division of Jainism into three jewels is a reformulation of the doctrine of  a twofold dharma or teaching (dvidharma) that was known to Hemacandra and  shared by all Jains. Jainism, according to this doctrine, is founded on two basic  principles. The first consists of theoretical and practical instructions related to  activity (pravrtti), the second of similar instructions related to nonactivity (nivrtti).  Activity includes moral acts and rituals (karma), whereas nonactivity encompasses  intellectual and experiential cognition (jnana). Both posit faith (darsana) in the  teaching and in its principal communicators.  

The main components of Jainism - faith, knowledge, and conduct - comple mented each other and applied to mendicants as well as to the laity. Both groups  were subordinated to the same moral system, both were engaged in ritual activity,  and both sought knowledge through intellectual and contemplative means. The  difference between the doctrine and practice of these two main segments of the  Jain congregation (sangha) and their views on morals and rituals (karma), on the  one hand, and intellectual and experiential cognition (jnana), on the other, can  be analyzed in terms of emphasis, mode of expression, and purpose. They agreed  that no ritual or moral activity by itself could result in liberation (moksa), even if  the activity in question encompassed intellectual and meditative components. In  accordance with the law of karma, any activity whatsoever, moral or ritual, re 

sulted in rebirth, preceded at best by a heavenly existence. The ethical code  separated mendicants and laity in terms of the extent to which the moral vowsYOGASASTRA OF HEMACANDRA 597  

were to be observed. Yet the same ethics brought them together as a religious  group by excluding certain rituals, not least of which were those of what is known  as left-hand Tantra (yamacara). The most significant dividing line was, however,  related to the purpose of moral and ritual activity or, differently expressed, the  art of performing any act, moral or ritual. Whereas lay religion sought to improve  activity mainly by performing rituals and observing moral vows, and was hence  directed toward the first three objects of human activity (purusarthas) - duty  (dharma), wealth (artha), and desire (kama) - monastic religion sought to tran scend activity largely through advanced intellectual, ascetic, and meditative prac 

tices, thereby bringing the performer of ritual and moral activity in contact with  the agent of all activity, the Self (jiva). The monk or nun could then attain the  same moral, ritual, and cognitive perfection as that of the preeminent commu nicators of the Jain faith, the tirthankaras or Jinas.  

The above portrayal of Jainism in the form of three jewels (ratnatraya) or a  double teaching (dvidharma) is based on the first four chapters of the Yogasastra,  which in its turn draws on the Svetambara canonical scriptures (sruta) and the  exegetical tradition (sampradaya) down to the time of Hemacandra. The remaining  chapters of the Yogasastra contain information that gives a slightly different, or  rather, supplementary picture of mendicant doctrine and practice. This latter part  of the text reveals a Tantric influence of Trika Saiva provenance, which by the  time of Hemacandra had entered into mainstream Svetambara Jainism, as medi ated through the Digambara tradition. The relation between classical Jainism and  Tantra is stated in Yogasastra 1.5:  

Yoga [or the three jewels of Jainism] is [like] a sharp-edged axe for the tangle of  creepers of all calamities. It is a supernatural means for [attaining] the happiness of  liberation without [the use of] medical herbs (mula), spells (mantra) or Tantric [teach ings] (tantra).  

Accordingly, Tantra was regarded neither as an essential part of Jain theory nor  as the principal means for attaining liberation. As we shall see, however, it did  penetrate into mendicant divinatory and meditative practice, and promised mun dane as well as soteriological results. Above all else, Tantric influence manifested  itself in a general ritualization, using previously unknown methods and theories.  This emphasis on certain forms of ritual activity may itself be viewed as consti tuting a Tantric influence. Furthermore, and in parallel with the development of  Buddhist Tantra or Vajrayana, the laity was not alone in performing Tantra. Mem bers of the monastic community, including Hemacandra himself, embraced vari ous forms of Tantric practice. These included elements of ritual as well as exercises  of a more meditative, cognitive nature. As Paul Dundas has discussed, the ad herence to a strict ethical code and the absence of a linguistic theory of sacred,  mantric sound, combined with a pluralistic metaphysical philosophy, were factors  that ultimately hampered the general influence of Tantra on Jainism as compared  with the wide-ranging effects it had on Hinduism and Buddhism. As far as Sve tambara Jainism and its principal summa is concerned, the Yogasastra's first four 

598 OLLE QVARNSTRO M  

chapters, containing a description of classical Jain orthopraxy and orthodoxy,  received considerably wider circulation among Jains in India and later abroad  than did the remaining eight chapters, which were of a more Tantric bent. What ever the overall extent of Tantric influence on Svetambara Jainism may have been,  the Yogasastra seems not to have contributed appreciably toward the inclusion of  Tantra into that tradition.  

In the following, I provide two sets of examples illustrating Svetambara Jain  Tantra as it manifested in divinatory and meditative practices, respectively. They  consist of translated passages from the Yogasastra based on Jambuvijaya's critical  edition and furnished with additional information in square brackets from the  autocommentary, the Svopajnavrtti.  

The translated passages from the Yogasastra and the Svopajnavrtti are based on  Muni Jambuvijaya's critical edition, Yogasastram Svopajnavrttivibhusitam, 3 vols.  (Bombay: Jaina Sahitya Vikasa Mandala, 1977-1986). An English translation of  the Yogasastra will shortly be published by the present author under the title, The  Yogasastra of Hemacandra. A Twelfth-Century Handbook on Svetambara Jainism.  

Further Reading  

On Hemacandra and Kumarapala, see Georg Buhler, The Life of Hemacandracarya,  translated from the German by Manilal Patel (Santiniketan: Singhi Jaina Jnana pitha, 1936), and John Cort, "Who Is a King? Jain Narratives of Kingship in  Medieval Western India," in Open Boundaries. Jain Communities and Cultures in  Indian History, edited by John Cort (Albany: State University of New York Press,  1998), pp. 85-110. The meditative and divinatory practices described in the  Yogasastra art best understood in the light of the following two general introduc tions to Jainism: Padmanabh S. Jaini, The Jaina Path of Purification (Berkeley and  Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1979), and Paul Dundas, The Jains  (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1992). In addition, one may consult special ized studies, such as John Cort, "Medieval Jaina Goddess Traditions," Numen 34.2  (1987): 235-55; Paul Dundas, "Becoming Gautama: Mantra and History in Sve tambara Jainism," in Open Boundaries, edited by John Cort, pp. 31-52; Kalipada  Mitra, "Magic and Miracle in Jaina Literature," Indian Historical Quarterly 15.2  (1939): 175-82; Mitra, "Magic and Miracle in Jaina Literature," Jaina Antiquary  7.2 (1941): 81-88, and 8.1 (1942): 9-24; Umakant P. Shah, "A Peep into the  Early History of Tantra in Jaina Literature," in Bharatakaumudi. Studies in Indology  in Honour of Dr. Radha Kumud Mookerji, part 2 (Allahabad, 1947), pp. 839-54.  For more general context, see Agehananda Bharati, The Tantric Tradition (London:  Rider, 1975), pp. 138-52,161-62; and Sanjukta Gupta, Dirk J. Hoens, and Teun  Goudriaan, Hindu Tantrism (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1979). On the adoption of Tantric  elements in Svetambara Jainism, see Olle Qvarnstrom, "Stability and Adaptability:  A Jain Strategy for Survival and Growth," Indo-Iranian Journal 41 (1998): 33-55;  and on the doctrine of a double dharma (dvidharma), see Qvarnstrom, "Hari-

YOGASASTRA OF HEMACANDRA 599  

bhadra and the Beginnings of Doxography in India," in Approaches to Jaina Studies:  Philosophy, Logic, Rituals and Symbols, edited by Olle Qvarnstrom and Narain K.  Wagle (Toronto: University of Toronto, Centre for South Asian Studies, 1999),  pp. 169-210. Jain Tantric and Siddha traditions in Gujarat are treated by David  Gordon White, The Alchemical Body: Siddha Traditions in Medieval India (Chicago:  

University of Chicago Press, 1996), pp. 114-18, 331-34. Tantric influence on  Jain art is beautifully illustrated in Pratapaditya Pal, The Peaceful Liberators: Jain  Art from India (Los Angeles: Los Angeles County Museum of Art, 1994), pp. 56,  79-80, 229; and Colette Caillat and Ravi Kumar, The Jain Cosmology (Basel, Paris,  New Delhi: Ravi Kumar Publications, 1981), pp. 36, 193-94.  

Selections from the Yogasastra and the Svopajnavrtti  

The first set of examples is drawn from the fifth chapter of the Yogasastra. This  chapter contains a description of breath control (pranayama) along with an in ventory of various divinatory practices.  

The definition of pranayama basically agrees with that of the classical com mentators on the Yogasutra, the principal textbook on yoga with which Hema candra was familiar and whose fundamental tenets most Indian religions acknowl edged. The use of seed syllables (bija mantras) and the adoption of Tantric  

physiognomy, including the theory of cakras or lotuses (padmas) and channels  (nadis), clearly demonstrate, however, a Tantric influence on the kind of breath  control used by Jain mendicants as an optional precondition to meditation. The  main purpose of controlling the breath was to improve physical health (kayarogya)  and thereby the capacity for intellectual and meditative cognition.  

The knowledge of the breath and its movement in the different parts of the  body was also part of mendicant divinatory practice. The main purpose of this  was to determine the time of death (kalajnana) and foretell future (negative)  events. The span of life could be prolonged thereby, its quality raised, and the  necessary preparations for death carried out fully and properly. This concern was  shared by all Indian religions and especially prevailed during the medieval period.  

The different forms of divination described in the Yogasastra are also mostly of  a pan-Indian character and include the observation of changes in the body  (angavidya), palmistry (samudra), interpretation of dreams (svapnasastra), animal  portents (sakuna), oracular voices (upasruti), and interrogation with the help of  astrology (prasna). Occasionally the divinatory methods are amalgated with Jain  doctrine in combination with Tantric practice. These include the inspection of  the month and number of days during which the breath blows in a certain channel  (nadi), reading of shadows (chaya) in combination with pictorial, geometric sym bols (yantras), potent words (mantras or vidyas) repeated in meditation and ritual,  the mental installation of seed mantras and letters of the Sanskrit syllabary (ma 

trkas) on various parts of the body (angas) through ritual touch (nyasa), and  interrogation with the help of Tantric physiognomy.  

The first example of divination is drawn from Yogasastra 5.173-76. It illustrates 

600 OLLE QVARNSTRO M  

how the time of death was determined by means of invoking a divinity (devata)  through muttering (japa) a spell (vidya) on a given celestial occurence.  

A [female] deity who has properly been made to descend into a mirror, a  thumb, a wall, [or] a sword through [the repetition of] a magical spell (vidya)  will inform [a person] of her decision as to [the time of] death on being ques tioned. The [deity] is realized by muttering the spell Aum naravire tha tha  10,008 times at [the occasion of] a solar or lunar eclipse. If [that spell] is to  be brought into play, one should once more mutter [it] 1,008 times. Then the  deity becomes absorbed into the mirror, and so forth, [and] announces [her]  decision [as to the time of death, in the form of] a virgin. Thus the deity herself,  attracted by the [moral] character of the virtuous worshiper, announces her  definite decision on the duration of life [of the questioner].  

The next example is derived from Yogasastra 5.208-15 and illustrates the use  of yantras, mantras, matrkas, ahganyasa, and shadow reading in measuring a  person's longevity.  

One should first prepare a [hexagonal] yantra that contains the sacred syllable  Aum and place within [that Aum] the name of the person [whose lifetime is to  be determined]. [Inside each] corner [of the yantra should be inscribed] the  letter ra, which is filled with hundreds of flames related to the fire [element].  At the sides, [the yantra should be] surrounded by six vowels, beginning with  a, together with an anusvara [i.e., am, am, im, im, urn, and urn]. On the outside  of every corner should be a svastika mark drawn with one's own handwriting.  [Finally], the four sides [of the square that frames the yantra] should be en 

veloped by a visarga [h] preceded by ya [yah]. [Then] one should [mentally]  install [the yantra] on [one's own] feet, heart, head, and joints. After that,  having turned [one's] back toward the sun at the time of sunrise, a wise man  should observe his own shadow in order to determine his own and another  person's lifetime. If he sees the whole shadow, then [there will be] no death  within a year, but if the ears are absent, death will occur within twelve years.  If the hands, fingers, shoulders, hair, flanks, and the nose are absent, it fore bodes death in the course of ten, eight, seven, five, three, and one year[s],  respectively. If the head or chin are missing, he will die in six months, whereas  if the neck or eyes are absent, [death will occur] in one month [or] eleven  days, [respectively]. If the thorax contains an aperture, death will occur in  seven days, [and] if one were to see two shadows, then one moves close to  Yama [or death].  

The final example of divination demonstrates how a spell is mentally installed  on the body (ariganyasa) in order to consecrate the body and its shadow. The  shadow is then examined and the time of death ascertained. The spell urges the  thunderbolt-handed (yajrapanin) Indra, who overcomes death, and the spear-

YOGASASTRA OF HEMACANDRA 601  

handed (sulapanin) Siva, to show their [true] nature, as propagators of Jainism.  According to Jain legend, a similar device was used by Hemacandra when he  brought Kumarapala to a Saiva temple and had Siva manifest himself in front of  the king and proclaim the superiority of the Jain faith. Yogasastra 5.217-23 reads  as follows.  

First one should [mentally] install the syllable sva on the crown of the head  (cuda) and Aum on the crest of the head (mastaka). Then [one should install]  ksi in the eyes, pa in the heart, and the syllable ha in the lotus of the navel.  Having consecrated one's shadow and eyes by [repeating] the spell [Aum jum  sah aum mrtyum jayaya aum vajrapanine sulapanine hara hara daha daha sva 

rupam darsaya darsaya hum phat] 108 times, [and] having turned [one's] back  toward the sun at sunrise, a competent person who has performed this [type  of] worship (puja) in a proper way should take notice of the shadow of another  when it concerns others' [length of life], and his own shadow when it comes  to his own. If the entire shadow is seen, then death [will] not [occur] in a year.  On the other hand, if the legs, shanks, or knees are missing, death [will occur]  within three, two, and one year[s], [respectively]. If the thighs are absent,  [death will occur] in ten months. If the waist [is missing] one will die within  eight or nine months, whereas if the stomach is absent, [death occurs] in five  months. Again, if the neck is lacking, one will die in four, three, two, or one  month[s]. If the armpit is lacking, [death will occur] in fifteen days, whereas  if the arm is nonexistent, [death will occur] in ten days. If the shoulder is  absent, [death will occur] in eight days, but if the heart is removed, [death will  occur] in twelve hours [or four yamas, "watches"]. However, if the head is  absent, [death will occur] in three hours [or one yama]. If, finally, the entire  [body] does not appear [in the shadow, death will occur] instantaneously.  

The second set of examples of Tantric influence on Svetambara Jainism con cerns meditative practices and, more specifically, virtuous meditation or dhar madhyana. According to canonical and traditional Svetambara Jainism, this kind  of meditation does not result in liberation (moksa), which requires the practice of  the subsequent pure meditation (sukladhyana). In the Yogasastra, however, dhar madhyana is furnished with an additional variety unattested in prior Svetambara  texts. Whereas the canonical form of virtuous meditation does not present any  Tantric influence, this new addition does reflect such an influence, which prob ably originated from Trika Saivism, and stems either from a direct influence or - and this is more likely - indirectly from a Digambara work, entitled the Jnanar nava, written by Subhacandra in the tenth century C.E. This philosopher was then  instrumental in introducing Tantric meditation into both Digambara and Svetam bara Jainism, and thereby also bringing Jain meditation into conformity with  parallel developments in Hinduism and Buddhism.  

Tantric virtuous meditation as presented in the Yogasastra consists of four main  types. We focus on the second of these, called padastha-dhyana, "meditation on 

602 OLLE QVARNSTRO M  

sacred syllables." If not meditated upon as such, these syllables constituted dif ferent spells. Unlike common Tantric linguistic usage, these spells were synony mously labeled mantras or vidyas. Here, Hemacandra deviated from the distinc tion between mantras as letters presided over by male deities and mastered by  

mere repitition, and vidyas as combination of words invoking female divinities  and mastered only through the practice of the prescribed rite (sadhana). The spells  ranged in length from monosyllabic to multisyllabic formulae, and reproduced  meaningless sounds, acronyms of central Jain concepts, and meaningful dogmas  couched in Prakrit rather than in Sanskrit, which was the dominant language of  Indian mantric science (mantrasastra). The spells further show distinct syntactical  features, as demonstrated by Agehananda Bharati. The application of spells in  meditation as well as in divination was criticized by early Jainism, but was grad ually incorporated into it, and had by the time of Hemacandra become one of the  main components of Svetambara Jain Tantra. Judging from the Yogasastra, it was  even looked upon as paramount over the rest of the Jain teaching, which was  reckoned as simply "textual details" (granthavistara). Hemacandra, however, urges  meditators to use only Jain mantras and to avoid those of Hindu provenance,  which were considered part of the "evil sciences" (durvidya). From a historical  point of view, however, Dundas has shown that many of the Jain mantras and  vidyas indicate that Jain involvement in mantrasastra often corresponded to that  of the Hindus. The efficacy of the spells resulted in everything from knowledge  of the scriptures to miraculous powers (siddhis or labdhis), heaven and liberation  (svargapavarga). The majority of spells found in the Yogasastra are variations of  the pancanamaskara mantra or "the reverent salutation to the five [supreme beings  (paramesthins)]." This served as a Jain litany and was used at various ceremonial  occasions. The mantra paid homage to the Jinas or the worthy ones (arahantas),  the perfected beings (siddhas), the mendicant leaders (ayanriyas), the mendicant  preceptors (uvajjhayas), and the mendicants (sahus).  

In the following, I attempt to give a few examples of how the various forms of  the pancanamaskara mantra were used as part of virtuous meditation or dhar madhyana. The first example illustrates how the eight syllables constituting the  first sentence of the pancanamaskara mantra are envisioned as stationed on the  eight petals of a lotus representing the Self (jiva). By intensive and prolonged  meditation on these syllables, with or without Aum, worldly and spiritual goals  are obtained. The mantra Aum is here used in a Jain fashion as an acronym  denoting the five holy beings worshiped in the Jain litany. The letter a signifies  the arahantas (the worthy ones), asariras (the Siddhas, "the perfected beings"),  and ayariyas (the [mendicant] leaders); u the uvajjhayas ([the mendicant] precep tors); and m the munis (that is, the sahus, "the mendicants"). Yogasastra 8.66-71  says as follows:  

One may [further] meditate on the luminous Self in an eight-petaled lotus  which on its petals has [the eight] syllables of the mantra, [na-mo a-ra-ham ta-nam], beginning with Aum respectively. Having installed the first [syllable 

YOGASASTRA OF HEMACANDRA 603  

on the petal] facing east from the circle, one should repeat [this] eight-lettered  mantra 1,100 times. In this manner, the other petals, pointing in due order  from the east, [should be installed with na-mo a-ra-ham-ta-nam, respectively].  The mendicant should [then] repeat [this mantra for] eight days in order to  neutralize all obstacles. When eight days have elapsed, these [eight] syllables,  installed successively on the petals, begin to look as if alive to him, and even  such terrifying beings as lions, elephants, demons (raksasas), evil spirits (vyan 

taras) and others, which [all] cause resistance in meditation, are instantly pac ified. Those who desire the fruits of this world should meditate on the mantra  [na-mo a-ra-ham-ta-nam] preceded by Aum, but those who are desirous of the  state of liberation should meditate on [this mantra] without Aum.  

The second passage constitutes yet another example of how an acronym is used  as an object of Jain Tantric meditation. Analogous to Aum, this acronym is com posed of the initial letters of the names of the five elevated beings celebrated in  the pancanamaskara mantra. The acronym reads a-si-a-u-sa and derives a from  arahanta, si from siddha, a from ayariya, u from uvajjhaya, and sa from sahu. The  different syllables are to be related to the cakras or lotuses positioned in the navel,  head, mouth, heart, and throat. Yogasastra 8.76-77 reads as follows:  

One should [also] meditate on the syllable a [from the mantra a-si-a-u-sa],  located in the lotus of the navel, the syllable si in the lotus of the head, the  syllable a in the lotus of the mouth, the syllable u in the lotus of the heart,  [and] the syllable sa in the lotus of the throat. Similarly one should meditate  on other seed [syllables] which are beneficial to all.  

The final example of Jaina Tantric meditation concerns the most central of all  spells based upon the pancanamaskara mantra, namely arham. This word is the  Sanskrit equivalent of the Prakrit arahanta, denoting the first category of supreme  beings. As the syllables constituting this mantra also are the first and last syllables  of the Sanskrit syllabary, it was the object of considerable speculation in medieval  Tantric texts. The autocommentary on Yogasastra 8.18-22 states, for example,  that "[arham], which begins with a and ends with ha has the letter r in the middle  together with a dot (that is, the character m), that is, the ultimate reality. He who  knows this is a knower of reality." The mantra arham was, however, primarily  used as an object of meditation.  

The following quote demonstrates how to meditate on the mantra arham. This  act is preceded by envisioning an eight-petaled lotus situated below the center of  the navel, comprising a pericarp with a line of vowels as well as petals with the  different classes of letters in the Sanskrit syllabary. The pancanamaskara mantra  is inscribed in all eight of the interstices between the petals, and the sacred syl 

lables Aum and hrim appear on top of each of the petals. Having meditated on  arham, one should imagine that one splits the various knots (granthis) or obstacles  related to the different cakras by means of this very subtle sound as it moves 

604 OLLE QVARNSTRO M  

through the middle path, the susumna channel. This and other additional prac tices finally result in one becoming all-seeing, free from attachment, aversion, and  delusion, worshiped by gods, and merged into the state of the supreme Self (par amatman). Yogasastra 8.8-9 explains this as follows:  

The first letter [of the syllabary, a], should be placed in front [of the lotus]  and the final letter [ha], at its center accompanied by [the letter] r - which is  spotless as snow - a pleasant crescent, and a dot (m). This holy word, arham,  which brings one in contact with the essence of life, [should first be uttered  in the mind] with a short [sound], then with a long, [then with a] protracted,  [then with a] subtle and [finally with an] excessively subtle sound. 
