+++
title = "Vijayanagara vaiShNavism"
+++


VAIṢṆAVISM IN VIJAYANAGARA
By B. A. SALETORE

Elsewhere I have shown that *Śaivism*, through the efforts of its most powerful socio-religious custodians the *Sthānikas*, had maintained for centuries its great status in the history of the land.[^184_1] Since the days of its early success over Jainism,[^184_2] it had to contend with its great rival *Vaiṣṇavism* for quite a long time; but on the appearance of the founders of the famous Vijayanagara Empire in A.D. 1346, *Śaivism* again gathered renewed strength. [2, 3] And for nearly two centuries after that date, it was the most prominent religion of the country. In the course of the long supremacy which *Śaivism* maintained in southern and western India, even the magnificent achievements of such intellectual and spiritual giants like the great *Madhvācārya*, failed to dislodge *Śaivism* from the paramount position it had occupied in the land.[^184_4] [3]
[^184_1]: Read Saletore, *The Sthānikas and Their Historical Importance*, in the Journal of the Bombay University, VII, Part I.
[^184_2]: Read Saletore, *Medieval Jainism*, Chs. VII and VIII.
[^184_3]: Read Saletore, *Social and Political Life in the Vijayanagara Empire*, I, pp. 13, seq. The date A.D. 1336 given for the foundation of Vijayanagara has no basis in history. [3]
[^184_4]: On the life and achievements of this remarkable *Vaiṣṇava* teacher, read Saletore, *Ancient Karnataka*, I, pp. 416-449.

But this prolonged supremacy of *Śaivism* received a shattering blow in the first quarter of the sixteenth century A.D., when the great Hindu royal family that ruled over practically the whole of southern India exchanged a *Vaiṣṇava* god for a *Śaivite* deity. [3] The reigning Hindu imperial House was that of Vijayanagara, and the monarch, *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya* the Great. [3]

Before we elucidate this assertion with the help of historical data, it is worthwhile to reject here the statement made by some that the Vijayanagara royal House had espoused the cause of *Vaiṣṇavism* in the days of king *Virūpākṣa*. According to the Rev. Heras, this ruler was responsible for making *Vaiṣṇavism* the State religion. 

> 'Inspite of this Jaina influence, the Vijayanagara sovereigns remained faithful to the cult of Śiva till they became disciples of *Śrī Vaiṣṇavism* towards the close of the 15th century.' 

The Rev. Heras then describes the advent of two brothers from *Eṭṭūr*, by name *Nṛsimhācārya* and *Śrīraṅgācārya*, at the Vijayanagara court; and [[P184]] their success in converting the Vijayanagara monarch *Virūpākṣa* from *Śaivism* into *Vaiṣṇavism*. He then concludes thus—'Accordingly the sovereign (King *Virūpākṣa*) foreswore *Śaivism* and became a fervent *Vaiṣṇava*. On this occasion, the majority of his subjects also became followers of *Vaiṣṇavism*[^185_1].'

The above conclusion which is no doubt based on *Anantācārya's* work called *Prapannāmṛtam*, is untenable. *Anantācārya* gives the entire story of the alleged conversion of King *Virūpākṣa* from *Śaivism* into *Vaiṣṇavism*. He relates that the two brothers named above, on entering a haunted palace in the city of Vijayanagara, pacified the ghosts that resided in it. The two brothers then related the story of the *Rāmāyaṇa* to King *Virūpākṣa* who, we are told, had ascended the throne after murdering his relatives. The ruler stupefied with the miraculous work of the two brothers, felt great reverence for the *Rāmāyaṇa*, the god *Rāma*, and the preceptor *Eṭṭūr Nṛsimhācārya*. He forthwith became a staunch *Vaiṣṇava*, and in token of his new creed, exchanged the time-honoured Vijayanagara sign-manual of *Virūpākṣa*—which was the name of the celebrated deity in the temple of that name at the great capital itself for the new one of *Śrī Rāma*. And on the king renouncing the *Śaiva* faith for the *Vaiṣṇava* creed, his subjects followed suit; and after him, the Vijayanagara monarchs, who till that time had been devotees of *Śiva*, became adherents of *Viṣṇu*.[^185_2]

Entire credence cannot be given to the above story of the alleged conversion of the Vijayanagara royal House from *Śaivism* into *Vaiṣṇavism* in the reign of King *Virūpākṣa*, as given by *Anantācārya* in his *Prapannāmṛtam*. King *Virūpākṣa* reigned from A.D. 1467 until A.D. 1478. His reign was not only short but uneventful.[^185_3] Even the uncritical foreign traveller, Fernão Nuniz, gives a very gruesome account of the reign of King *Virūpākṣa*. He relates thus about that ruler—

> 'As long as he reigned he was given over to vice, caring for nothing but women, and to fuddle himself with drink and amuse himself, and never showed himself either to his captains or to his people; so that in a short time he lost that which his forefathers had won and left to him'. 

And Nuniz continues to relate how King *Virūpākṣa* 'in mere sottishness slew many of his captains', and ultimately gave an opportunity to one of his captains who was called *Narsymgua*, who was in some manner akin to him', to attack and dethrone the useless monarch.[^185_4]

[^185_1]: Henry Heras, *The Aravidu Dynasty of Vijayanagara*, pp. 540-541.
[^185_2]: S. K. Aiyangar, *The Sources of Vijayanagara History*, pp. 77-79.
[^185_3]: Rice, *Mysore and Coorg from the Inscriptions*, p. 177.
[^185_4]: Sewell, *A Forgotten Empire—Vijayanagara*, pp. 305-306.
[[P185]]

usurpation by *Sāļuva Nṛsimha*, also called *Narasiṅga Rāya Oḍeyar*, the most powerful noble of the times, of the Vijayanagara throne.[^186_1]

For our purpose we may note, therefore, that King *Virūpākṣa's* reign being utterly devoid of any importance, could never have been marked by such outstanding event like the conversion of the monarch and of the people from *Śaivism* into *Vaiṣṇavism*. Secondly, it is not correct to say that the Vijayanagara monarch *Virūpākṣa* and his successors used the new sign-manual *Śrī Rāma* instead of the old one *Śrī Virūpākṣa*. If it were really so, then, one should not have found the sign-manual *Śrī Virūpākṣa* being in vogue for nearly 120 years after King *Virūpākṣa*. The fact that even Emperor *Sadāśiva Rāya* used the well-known sign-manual *Śrī Virūpākṣa* (in Kannaḍa), so late as A.D. 1545,[^186_2] is enough to disprove the statement of *Anantācārya* that the Vijayanagara monarchs beginning with King *Virūpākṣa* used *Śrī Rāma* as their sign-manual.

What seems more probable is that the gradual decline of *Śaivism* among the members of the Vijayanagara royal family, and consequently among the people of the Empire, began after King *Virūpākṣa’s* reign. The very fact that the famous *Sāļuva* usurper named above called himself after one of *Viṣṇu’s* names—*Nṛsimha* or *Narasiṅga*—suggests that an anti-*Śaivite* tendency had already begun to set in among the royal personages at Vijayanagara. It is precisely this slow change in the monarchical attitude that is bemoaned by *Vīra Śaiva* authors like *Virūpākṣa Paṇḍita* (A.D. 1584), who in his well-known work called *Cenna Basava Purāṇa* relates that after the death of *Prauḍha Rāya* (i.e., evidently *Immaḍi Rāya* or *Mallikārjuna*, who ruled from A.D. 1446 until A.D. 1467), came King *Virūpākṣa* and *Narasanna* (i.e., *Sāļuva Nṛsimha*), when *Śaivism* declined and *anācāra* raised its head.[^186_3] The *anācāra* referred to here was evidently the name given by the *Vīra Śaivas* to the rising tide of *Vaiṣṇavism*.

[^186_1]: Rice, *Mysore and Coorg from the Inscriptions*, p. 117.
[^186_2]: *Epigraphia Carnatica*, IV, Ng. 58, p. 128.
[^186_3]: *Virūpākṣa Paṇḍita, Cenna Basava Purāṇa*, 63, 40 seq.; *Sadakṣaradeva, Rājasekhara-vilāsa*, I, v. 17; *Adṛśyakavi, Prauḍharāja-carite*, (or *Prauḍharāyana-kāvya*) I, 41; I, 12.

[[P186]]
But it must be confessed that the monarchs of Vijayanagara were too broadminded thus to throw overboard suddenly *Śaivism* which had been the State religion since the date of the foundation of the Vijayanagara Empire (A.D. 1346). Hence we find that in the reigns of the rulers who succeeded *Sāļuva Nṛsimha*, the *Tuḷuva Narasa* (A.D. 1496-A.D. 1503) and the latter's eldest son *Vīra Narasiṃha* (A.D. 1504-A.D. 1509), nothing happened in the capital to create the impression that the old faith of *Śaivism* had been driven into the background by the monarchs. But there were, however, two events which clearly showed which way the wind was blowing. 

One was the notable success which the *Vaiṣṇava* teacher *Śrīpāda* met with at the hands of King *Sāļuva Nṛsimha*. It is related that this *Vaiṣṇava* guru *Śrīpāda* sat on the throne on the occasion of an evil *muhūrta* (*kuhayoga*) to avert disaster to the monarch, and that consequently he was honoured with the title of *Rāya*.[^187_1] The exact date when *Śrīpāda Rāya* sat on the Vijayanagara throne is, however, still a matter of uncertainty. The success which crowned the efforts of *Śrīpāda Rāya* in averting the danger to the Vijayanagara monarch may have been partly responsible for the keen desire which the ruler *Sāļuva Nṛsimha* showed to *Vaiṣṇavism*. Indeed, *Rājānātha Ḍiṇḍima* in the 9th Canto of his work called *Sāļuvābhyudayam* relates that the Emperor *Sāļuva Nṛsimha*, while on a visit to the famous temple of Tirupati in the south, gave a new crown to the god *Śrīnivāsa*, when he himself was assuming an imperial crown after his glorious victories.[^187_2]

The other fact which added to the strength of *Vaiṣṇavism* was the marked favour *Vyāsarāya*, the great *Vaiṣṇava* teacher who will figure presently, secured at the hands of the ruler King *Narasa*. *Somanātha* in his work called *Vyāsayogi-caritam* tells us that King *Narasa* took the advice of *Vyāsarāya* every day in private (*evam eva bhaktyā sambhāvayantam rahasyena enam dharma-paropadeśena pratyaham anugṛhṇan*).[^187_3] There cannot be any doubt about the powerful hold *Vyāsarāya* had on the Vijayanagara court in the days of King *Narasa* and King *Vīra Narasiṃha*.[^187_4] But the fact that King *Narasa* took secretly (*rahasyena*) the advice of *Vyāsarāya* suggests also that the great *Vaiṣṇava* teacher had not yet completely succeeded in winning over the illustrious royal House of Vijayanagara to his side. For he had to wait just a few years before he could finally unfurl the *Vaiṣṇava* banner in the great capital, thereby proving himself to be the greatest enemy *Śaivism* ever had in the mediæval times. And this opportunity he got in the reign of *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya*.

[^187_1]: *M.A.R.* for 1919, p. 36; B. Venkoba Rao places this event in A.D. 1471. *Vyāsayogi-caritam*, Intr. pp. xcvi, xcvii, xciv. But this date falls within the reign of King *Virūpākṣa*, and, therefore, cannot be accepted.
[^187_2]: Venkoba Rao cites the relevant verses in *Vyāsayogi-caritam*, Intr. p. x.
[^187_3]: Venkoba Rao, ibid., p. 59.
[^187_4]: Venkoba Rao, ibid., pp. 57-58, 66.

[[P187]]
It was really in the reign of this great ruler *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya* that *Śaivism* gave place to *Vaiṣṇavism* as the State religion, although, as said above, the monarchs continued to use their old sign-manual *Śrī Virūpākṣa* at the end of their official grants, down till the days of Emperor *Sadāśiva* (A.D. 1543-A.D. 1567). The magnanimous *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya* never failed to use the same sign-manual, as his numerous grants amply prove.[^188_1] But two causes brought about the downfall of *Śaivism* in the Vijayanagara Empire. The first was the continued presence of great *Vaiṣṇava* teachers in the capital itself. One of these was the guru named above—*Vyāsarāya*. This learned man was the disciple of *Brahmaṇya Tīrtha*, and was the founder of the well-known *Vyāsarāya maṭha* at *Sōsale*, Tirumakūḍlu-Narsipura *tāluka*, Mysore State. A remarkable incident is narrated about him by his disciple and successor *Śrīnivāsa Tīrtha* in the latter's work called *Vyāsavijaya*. 

It is the following:— 

That the Vijayanagara monarch *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya* was once warned of an evil *muhūrta* (*kuhayoga*) approaching, and was advised to put someone on the throne during that time. Not knowing what to do, the Emperor sent his State elephant with a garland which the animal presented to *Vyāsayogi*, who was then in the capital. *Vyāsatīrtha* being an ascetic felt shy at the prospect of being asked to sit on the throne, and hid himself in a cave. But the State elephant, which was sent a second time, again went near him but this time to the cave. *Vyāsatīrtha* now deemed it prudent to obey the divine summons, and was, therefore, requested to sit on the throne and thereby avert the evil *muhūrta*. In order to manifest the danger, *Vyāsatīrtha* instead of sitting on the throne, threw his *kāṣāya* or red garment, which immediately was burnt. He then took his seat on the throne, and in the short time left to him, gave grants of land to Brahmans who had anointed him.[^188_2]

It is not surprising that *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya* should have considered such a teacher, who was the second *Vaiṣṇava* guru who had averted calamity to the imperial House on the occasion of a *kuhayoga*, his tutelary deity (*kuladevatā*), and that he should have vowed to devote everything he had for the worship of *Vyāsarāya*.[^188_3] To this *Vaiṣṇava* teacher *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya* granted lands in A.D. 1516, 1520, 1523 and 1527.[^188_4]

Another remarkable *Vaiṣṇava* teacher who toured the Vijayanagara Empire, and is said to have received honours at the hands of the same monarch, and of his successors too, was *Vallabhācārya*, about whom we shall deal with at some length in a separate paper.
[^188_1]: Witness, for instance, *E.C.*, IV, Ng. 81 dates A.D. 1513, p. 133 and quite a number of others.
[^188_2]: *M.A.R.* for 1919, p. 36; Venkoba Rao, op. cit.
[^188_3]: Venkoba Rao, op. cit., p. 81.
[^188_4]: *M.A.R.* for 1919, pp. 34-35; ibid. for 1920, p. 50; *E.C.*, VII, Sh. 84, Sh. 85, p. 33.

[[P188]]
These and others were the *Vaiṣṇava* champions who weaned *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya* from *Śaiva* faith and who brought him within the fold of *Vaiṣṇavism*. This ruler gave public expression to the new creed he adopted in three ways—Firstly, he built and renovated temples in honour of *Vaiṣṇava* deities; secondly, he ordered the construction of a prominent image in honour of *Viṣṇu*; and, finally, he made public his *Vaiṣṇava* tendency in his coinage. One of the most well-known edifices in the city of Vijayanagara was the *Kṛṣṇasvāmi* temple. Even now it is one of the best-liked buildings amidst the ruins of that city. Sewell opined that it was constructed in A.D. 1513 by *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya* after his successful return from his eastern campaigns.[^189_1] While Sewell is correct in maintaining that the ruler constructed that temple on the latter's return from the eastern campaigns, he is incorrect in dating that structure to A.D. 1513. For two stone records in that temple dated A.D. 1515 inform us that the monarch set up in that temple the image of *Kṛṣṇa* which he had brought from *Udayagiri*.[^189_2] This year A.D. 1515, therefore, was eventful in the history of *Vaiṣṇavism*. The construction of the *Kṛṣṇasvāmi* temple in the capital by *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya* signified the triumph of *Vaiṣṇavism* in that city as well as in the Vijayanagara Empire. *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya* seemed thereby to give public proof of his *Vaiṣṇavite* leanings; and he showed it further by a change in his coinage to which we shall presently turn. In the meanwhile we may observe that the *Kṛṣṇasvāmi* temple was not the only building which attested the change in the creed of the Emperor. It was about this time too that the additions to the *Viṭṭhalasvāmi* temple, also in the same city, were made by *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya*. The work of this most ornate of all religious edifices in the Vijayanagara Empire, however, was continued by *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya's* son and successor *Acyuta Deva Rāya*, and the latter's nephew Emperor *Sadāśiva Rāya*; and, as Sewell surmises, was probably stopped only by the destruction of the great city in A.D. 1565.[^189_3]

[^189_1]: Sewell, op. cit., p. 161.
[^189_2]: *M.A.R.* for 1920, p. 37.
[^189_3]: Sewell, op. cit., p. 163. 

Some maintain that *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya* brought the image of *Viṭṭhala*, popularly called *Viṭṭhoba*, from Pandharpur. (G. H. Khare, *Kṛṣṇadevarāya of Vijayanagara and the Viṭṭhala image of Paṇḍharpūr* in *The Vijayanagara Commemoration Volume*, pp. 191-196.) That this is all wrong—based as it is on a misleading statement in the *Annual Report of the Archt. Dept.* for 1922-1923, para 67, has been amply proved by Dr. C. Narayana Rao in his article on *An Identification of the Idol of Viṭṭhala in the Viṭṭhala temple at Hampī*, in the *Proceedings and Transactions of the Eighth All-India Oriental Conference held at Mysore*, pp. 715-726. But while Dr. Narayana Rao has succeeded in proving the prevalence of *Viṭṭhala* worship in Karnataka long before the days of *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya*, he has not [[P189]] given proof to show that there was *Viṭṭhala* worship in Vijayanagara itself. This may be given here. A copper-plate grant dated A.D. 1408 relates that in the reign of the Vijayanagara ruler *Deva Rāya*, there was a temple of the god *Viṭṭhala* on the bank of the Tuṅgabhadrā. In the presence of this god *Viṭṭhaleśvara* a specified grant was made by some citizens of the *Araga* Eighteen *Kampaṇa*. (*E.C.*, VIII, Tl. 222, p. 211.) This inscription proves not only that there was the god *Viṭṭhala* in the great capital in A.D. 1408, but that the famous temple in that god's name existed also in the first quarter of the fifteenth century. In view of this, Sewell's assertion that *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya* commenced the building of the *Viṭṭhalasvāmi* temple (Sewell, *Forg. Emp.*, p. 163) has to be abandoned. The *Viṭṭhala* temple at Vijayanagara does not seem to have been in any way prominent in the first quarter of the fifteenth century. And it cannot be maintained on the strength of the above inscription that *Vaiṣṇavism* was powerful in the capital in A.D. 1408.

The second method by which *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya* demonstrated to the world his new creed was by constructing a monolithic image of the god *Narasiṃha* in the capital. According to Sewell, it was in A.D. 1528 that this monolithic stone image of the god *Viṣṇu* in His *avatāra* of *Narasiṃha*, the man-lion, was constructed out of a single boulder of granite that lay near the south-western gate of the *Kṛṣṇasvāmi* temple.[^190_1]

But the most successful means *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya* the Great adopted to signalize his conversion from *Śaivism* into *Vaiṣṇavism* was in his coinage. In the first five years of his reign, he minted coins of what are known as the *Umā-maheśvara* type. That is to say, coins which had on their obverse *Śiva* and *Pārvatī*, with a trident in the hand of *Śiva*; and on the reverse, bearing the legend *Śrī Kṛṣṇa Rāya* in Nāgarī. On his bringing the image of *Kṛṣṇa* from *Udayagiri*, the Emperor began to mint coins which belong to the *Bālakṛṣṇa* type. These coins contain on the obverse the following—the divine baby *Bālakṛṣṇa* seated on a seat, with one knee bent and resting on the seat, and the other raised up and supporting the left arm which is stretched out at ease. The right hand holds a lump of butter. The Child wears large ear-rings, a girdle of jingles, jingled or beaded bracelets, armlets and anklets on his fat little body and limbs; and on His head a crown of peacock's feathers with a string of flowers above. In field there is a conch to the right and a discus to the left. And on the reverse is a larger three lined Nāgarī legend—*Śrī Pratāpa Kṛṣṇa*.[^190_2]

No other proclamation was necessary to show that the Emperor was now a staunch devotee of *Viṣṇu*, although, as related above, he never left off using the time-honoured sign-manual of *Śrī Virūpākṣa* at the end of his royal grants, down till the last days of his reign. But so far as the rivalry of *Śaivism* and *Vaiṣṇavism* is concerned,

[^190_1]: Sewell, ibid., p. 163.
[^190_2]: *M.A.R.* for 1930, p. 70.
[[P190]]

*Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya's* reign marked an epoch. The success of *Vaiṣṇavism* was now unchallenged. And although *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya's* successors strenuously endeavoured to work for the common welfare and to give equal patronage to all religions, yet the days of *Śaivism* were numbered. Truly it may be said without any exaggeration that after that great monarch's time, *Śaivism* lay beaten and humbled for over three centuries. A negative factor which added to the success of *Vaiṣṇavism* was this—That *Śaivism* did not produce any remarkable intellectual giant who could successfully meet and overthrow men like *Vyāsatīrtha* and others. This told sadly on the career of the old faith, and especially on its socio-religious custodians the *Sthānikas*, who had so successfully and creditably maintained, as is undoubtedly proved by the many epigraphs we have cited elsewhere, the *Śaivite* supremacy all over southern and western India for nearly ten long centuries.

And when once thus the *Śaivite* hold on the great capital was shaken, its grip over the rest of the Vijayanagara Empire was simultaneously loosened. [2] To the *Sthānikas*, who were always in the van-guard of *Śaivism*, this meant everything: with the transference of the allegiance of the monarchs of Vijayanagara from *Śaivism* to *Vaiṣṇavism* meant the disappearance of the most solid support they had in the land. And their success or failure in the country depended on the whims of the provincial rulers and the general public, and on the nature of the propaganda their rivals—the leaders of *Vaiṣṇavism*—made in the different parts of the country. It is in the examination of the last factor that we come to the saddest feature in the history of the rivalry between *Śaivism* and *Vaiṣṇavism*. We can best illustrate this point by restricting ourselves to one particular province of the great Vijayanagara Empire, where the growing influence of *Vaiṣṇavism* practically annihilated the *Sthānikas*. This province was the well-known *Tuḷuvanāḍu* which now goes by the name of South Kanara. A careful and detailed investigation of the facts to be presently narrated has revealed to the writer that in this distant province of Vijayanagara was waged perhaps the bitterest part of the *Śaiva-Vaiṣṇava* struggle.

A few details are to be explained before we enumerate concrete cases of the intensity of the struggle between the two great creeds of the land. In *Tuḷuva* is the famous seat of *Vaiṣṇavism*—*Uḍipi*—from where the great *Madhvācārya* had preached the gospel of *Dvaitism*. We have elsewhere given all available details connected with the life and achievement of this greatest son of *Tuḷuva*.[^191_1] *Uḍipi* before and during the early years of *Ānandatīrtha* was, as we have amply [[P191]] proved in the same work,[^192_1] essentially a *Śaivite* centre. Indeed, it was from the *Śaivite* ranks that that great Teacher had recruited followers into his fold. Notwithstanding the activities of this celebrated *Vaiṣṇava* teacher, it must be admitted that for nearly three centuries after him the *Śaivites* of *Tuḷuva*, especially in and around *Uḍipi*, managed to hold their own against their growing rivals—the *Vaiṣṇavites*.

Two causes enabled them to resist stubbornly the rising tide of *Vaiṣṇavism* in *Tuḷuva*. One was the fact that the ruling dynasty of the province—the *Ālupas*—were essentially *Śaivites*; and when they did evince a strong desire to change their faith, it was Jainism, and not *Vaiṣṇavism*, that they patronized.[^192_2] The other cause was that the strength of the *Śaivites* of *Tuḷuva* lay not so much in the State patronage as in the support they secured from corporate bodies of *Tuḷuva*. Of these corporate bodies the most powerful was that of the *Niṭṭūru* people. *Niṭṭūru* is a village about a mile and half to the north of *Uḍipi* proper. The leaders of the *Niṭṭūru* village came into serious conflict with one of the most remarkable *Vaiṣṇava* leaders of *Tuḷuva*—*Vādirāja*. We must now explain the events that brought about the downfall of the *Sthānikas* of *Tuḷuva* in the days of *Vādirāja*.

*Vādirāja* lived from A.D. 1539 until A.D. 1597.[^192_3] This famous guru along with *Vijayendratīrtha* had studied under the celebrated *Vyāsatīrtha*.[^192_4] The extraordinary influence which *Vyāsarāya* wielded at the court of Vijayanagara and the conversion of *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya* from *Śaivism* into *Vaiṣṇavism* must have had the inevitable effect of creating in the mind of *Vādirāja* a desire to do for *Tuḷuva* what his teacher *Vyāsarāya* had done for Vijayanagara. [2] *Vādirāja* was correct: after all *Tuḷuva* was his own province, and the spread of *Vaiṣṇavism* in it was his own concern. And it was not a superhuman effort for *Vādirāja* to achieve as signal a success in *Tuḷuva* as *Vyāsarāya* had won in Vijayanagara, especially when we remember that his fame had spread throughout the land as one of the most learned men of the times, and as one who had thousands of followers, especially in the whole region of Karnataka. *Vādirāja* soon got some excuse to execute his plans.

[^191_1]: Saletore, *Ancient Karnataka*, I, pp. 416-449, op. cit.
[^192_1]: Ibid., pp. 449, and ibid., n. (2).
[^192_2]: Ibid., pp. 413-414.
[^192_3]: On *Vādirāja's* date, read Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, XVII, pp. 203-210, where Mr. Gode utilized my note on *Vādirāja*. Prof. B. N. Krishnamurti Sharma of the Annamalai University has, since then, conclusively proved that *Vādirāja* lived in the sixteenth century. Annals of the B.O.R.I., XVIII, pp. 187-197; The Poona Orientalist, II, pp. 1-21.
[^192_4]: Venkoba Rao, op. cit., Intr. p. ciii; Pandit Shrinivasa Bhat, *Life of Vādirāja* (in Kannaḍa), pp. 22, 35.

[[P192]]

In *Tuḷuva* the great *Śaivite*, and, therefore, the *Sthānika*, centres were *Uḍipi* itself, *Udayāvara* (the ancient capital of the *Ālupas*), *Niṭṭūru*, Malpe (*Koḍavūru*), *Baṇḍiñje*, *Uppūru*, Mangalore, Ullala, and Subrahmanya. The *Sthānika* temples in these centres were the following:—the celebrated *Rajatapīṭha* (*Ananteśvara*) temple at *Uḍipi*, the *Mahādeva* temple at *Udayāvara*, the *Somaliṅgeśvara* temple at *Niṭṭūru*, the *Oḍabhāṇḍeśvara* temple at Malpe (or *Kroḍāśrama*, as it was also called),[^193_1] the *Īśvara* temple at *Uppūru*, the *Īśvara* temple at *Baṇḍiñje*, the *Triśuleśvara* and *Sarabheśvara* temples at Mangalore, the *Someśvara* temple at Ullala, and the famous *Kārttikeya* or *Subrahmaṇya* temple at Subrahmanya.

The strength of the *Sthānikas* was centred at *Rajatapīṭha* (*Uḍipi*) and Subrahmanya. *Vādirāja* knew it, and at one stroke destroyed the *Sthānika*, and, therefore, the *Śaiva* influence at both the centres practically at the same time.

The position of the two parties was the following: *Vādirāja* led the *Vaiṣṇavites*, while the *Niṭṭūru* leaders championed the cause of the *Śaivites*. *Vādirāja* was assisted by two powerful local leaders—the *Ciṭṭupāḍi Ballāḷa* and the *Niḍambūru Ballāḷa*; while the *Niṭṭūru Śaivites* were helped by the people of Malpe (*Kroḍāśrama*), *Ananteśvara* (i.e., *Uḍipi* itself), and a vast number of *Holeyas* (now called in our own days Harijans). The *Niṭṭūru* corporate assembly had owned the *Ananteśvara* temple and the site upon which it stood, the whole *varga* of *Uḍipi* having been made in the name of that temple. It was the *Niṭṭūru* corporate assembly that had originally given to the *Vaiṣṇavites* the site for building a tank near that temple. In grateful acknowledgement of this fact the *Vaiṣṇavites* gave annually a specified rent for that piece of land to the *Ananteśvara* temple and offerings to the deity of *Jūmāḍi* (a powerful *bhūta* or devil) of *Niṭṭūru*. In course of time the *Vaiṣṇavites* built the now-famous temple of *Kṛṣṇa* and the eight *maṭhas* for the eight disciples of the great *Madhvācārya*. These events seem to have taken place some time after that learned guru. The *Kṛṣṇa* temple thus constructed faced eastwards after the manner of the *Ananteśvara* temple of the locality. With the intense propa- [[P193]] ganda which the *Vaiṣṇava Svāmīs* of *Uḍipi* made, especially by the *Svāmīs* of the *Uttarādi maṭha*, a need arose for building a larger tank opposite the *Kṛṣṇa* temple. And it was precisely around the question of building a larger tank opposite the same temple that the quarrel between the *Śaivites* and the *Vaiṣṇavites* was centred. 

The *Vaiṣṇavites* insisted on utilizing the space a larger part of which had been used by the *Śaivites* for dragging the great temple car of *Ananteśvara*, and another portion of which had been reserved for throwing the plantain leaves used for dining, for building the proposed tank. The *Vaiṣṇavites* were determined to dig the tank, and the *Śaivites* as determined to oppose them. The question became serious, and is said to have been reported to *Vādirāja*, who was then on the Western Ghats. Being unable to come himself, he, however, is alleged to have given an order to his followers in the shape of a poem (obviously addressed to the god *Kṛṣṇa*) in four stanzas, directing them to oppose the *Śaivites* and to build the tank. 

The *Vaiṣṇavites* carried the day, built the tank in the teeth of the *Sthānika* opposition, and even wrested the famous *Ananteśvara* temple itself from the hands of the *Śaivites*. And about the same time (middle of the sixteenth century A.D.) the *Vaiṣṇavites* became masters of the *Ananteśvara* temple, they managed to wipe out the last traces of the *Śaivite* influence at Subrahmanya. But as regards the exact circumstances of this *Śaivite-Vaiṣṇavite* struggle at Subrahmanya, however, we have no traces in tradition. It was probably due to the fact that Subrahmanya lay in an out-of-the way corner of *Tuḷuvanāḍu*.

The causes of the defeat of the *Sthānikas*, and, hence, of the *Śaivites* in *Uḍipi* were the following:—Although the *Niṭṭūru* people were supported by the leaders of *Kroḍāśrama* (Malpe) and *Ananteśvara*, yet they were numerically inferior to the *Vaiṣṇavites*, whose leaders were busy adding to their fold on the Ghats. 

Secondly, the [^193_1]: Prof. V. R. R. Dikshitar calls this well-known *Tuḷuva* temple, probably on the information supplied to him by Dewan Bahadur K. S. Ramaswami Sastri, *Uḍabhānēśvara*. (Dikshitar, *The Śilappadikāram*, p. 50, Oxford Uny. Press, 1939.) This is an error for *oḍa+bhāṇḍa-Īśvara* (Boat+wares-Īśvara) referring to a famous incident in the life of the great *Madhvācārya* concerning the ship which contained the image of *Śrī Kṛṣṇa* and which foundered near the *Somaliṅgeśvara* temple at *Kroḍa* (Malpe). 

Personal investigations conducted in and around Malpe between the years 1922 and 1924, and again in 1933, have shown me the correctness of the name *Oḍabhāṇḍeśvara*.

[^194_1]: 

    The first stanza of the poem, which is now sung on the *Tulsi pūjā* days in a slightly altered form, is said to have run as follows:—  
    > *Kollu Kollu Kollu Kollu Kaliyugada kallarannu*  
    > *Kollādiddare Ninna pūjege kallu hākulirpparu ||*  
    > *Kollu bēga kallaran-ella Madhva-Śrī-Vallabha |*  
    > *Kollādiddare nillaravaru Kaliyugada kallaru |*  
    >
    > I owe this poem and many details concerning this *Śaivite-Vaiṣṇavite* struggle to the late Mr. Padamunnur Ramacandrayya, himself a learned and benevolent *Sthānika* of *Niṭṭūru* and afterwards of Mangalore. Now-a-days the following variant of the poem is sung:—  
    > *Kōlu kōl-enniro Sad-guru līle mēlu mēl-enniro |*  
    > *ādhārava kaṭṭi cakrava bhedisi nāda-dināda sunāda kēḷi |*  
    > *sādhisi supumma mārga maneya pokku bodheya beḷakili bela beḷagolliro ||*

[[P194]]
*Niṭṭūru* people did not possess the financial resources which the eight *Svāmīs* of *Uḍipi* could command. And, finally, the *Sthānikas* were lacking in a leader who could match the redoubtable *Vādirāja* in wisdom and diplomacy.

We can well understand the above traditional account of the downfall of *Śaivism* and its civil custodians the *Sthānikas*, when we remember the few facts we have given above concerning the activities of the *Vaiṣṇava* leaders like *Vyāsarāya* in the Vijayanagara capital. The downfall of *Śaivism* and the *Sthānikas* in *Tuḷuva* in the second half of the sixteenth century A.D. followed closely on the heels of the success of *Vyāsarāya*, who had converted *Kṛṣṇa Deva Rāya* the Great into *Vaiṣṇavism*. The new creed which that monarch embraced may have been partly responsible for the apathy which the provincial viceroys of *Tuḷuva* placed over the Bārakūru and Maṅgaḷūru provinces showed to the high-handedness of the *Vaiṣṇavites* in the matter of settling their disputes with the *Śaivites*.

But that the *Vaiṣṇavites* had, indeed, dispossessed the *Śaivites* from their temples in *Tuḷuva* is proved not only by the poetic command given to the *Vaiṣṇavites* by *Vādirāja* referred to above, but also by the following which indicate that there was an element of force in the *Śaivite-Vaiṣṇavite* struggle of *Tuḷuva*. The fate that befell the *Śaivite* deities in the *Sthānika* strongholds mentioned above clearly proves this. 

Tradition relates that in the course of the struggle centering around the question of the construction of the tank at *Uḍipi*, the *Subrāya* stone (*Nāga-kallu*) in the *Ananteśvara* temple was removed from its place on the south-east of the same temple, and hidden behind a large stone slab to the north-east of the *bhojana-śālā* (dining hall) adjoining the *baḍagu mālige* (northern storey). Next the *Somaliṅgeśvara* image of the temple of the same name at *Niṭṭūru* was thrown out about twenty yards to the north-east of the same temple, where it still can be seen. A similar fate befell the deities of the *Sthānikas* elsewhere in *Tuḷuva*. At Udayāvara the god *Mahādeva* was removed in order to make room for the god *Gaṇapati*. The former image may now be seen in the vicinity of the *Gaṇapati* temple at Udayāvara. The image of *Īśvara* at *Uppūru* near *Uḍipi* was relegated into a heap of ashes in the outer yard (*pauḷi*) to the north-east of the temple. The *Mahāśeṣa* image at *Oḍabhāṇḍeśvara* was thrown into the tank near the temple.[^195_1] It cannot be made out whether the image of *Mallikārjuna* now found to the north-west of the neighbouring *Śaṅkaranārāyaṇa* temple was thrown out there at the same time.

<details><summary>विश्वास-टिप्पनी</summary>

Dispossession of sthAnikas, relocating images with due respect is credible;  but linga-breaking is not. 
</details>


[^195_1]: It was discovered some thirty-five years ago while repairing the tank, but being broken, so the report runs, was thrown into the sea.

[[P195]]

The traditional evidence, therefore, seems to point out to the use of force by the rivals of the *Sthānikas* in their attempt to oust the latter from the premier position they had held in the province for centuries as custodians of the *Śaivite* religion. We are to assume that a similar fate overtook the deities and temples of the *Sthānikas* and the *Śaivites* in other parts of southern and western India, where undoubtedly the *Vaiṣṇavites* were gaining more and more strength, although it must be confessed that direct evidence concerning this aspect of the *Śaivite-Vaiṣṇavite* struggle outside *Tuḷuva* is not forthcoming. While the decline of the *Sthānikas* in the distant province of *Tuḷuva* may be definitely dated to the second half of the sixteenth century A.D., it is not possible at the present stage of our investigations to say when exactly their downfall in other provinces of southern and western India began. We may surmise that it began a century and a half later, since we have ample evidence, as the reader must have gathered from the numerous instances cited in my monograph on the *Sthānikas* referred to at the beginning of this paper, to show that they continued to wield powerful influence in the land down till the eighteenth century A.D. 

But they were fighting a losing battle, notwithstanding the fact that the powerful *Keḷadi* royal family of *Ikkeri*, which followed the *Vīra Śaiva* faith, guided the destinies of a very large part of Karnataka, and the kings of Mysore, who were, as they are now, well-known for their religious toleration and broad-mindedness, ruled from Mysore. Neither the royal House of *Ikkeri* nor that of Mysore made any conscious endeavour to save the *Sthānikas* and the *Śaivites* from annihilation; but at the same time no Hindu royal family deliberately added to the difficulties of the *Śaivites* and brought about their ruin. The downfall of the *Śaivites* was to some extent inevitable; and, if it is permissible to say so, it may even be maintained that Nemesis had overtaken them. For just as in the seventh and eighth centuries of the Christian era, the *Śaivites* and the *Sthānikas* had violently uprooted the Jainas, dispossessing the latter of the shrines and images, both in the Tamil land and Karnataka,[^196_1] so now in the sixteenth century A.D. and after, the *Vaiṣṇavites* drove into the background the *Śaivites* not without a show of violence all over the land. 

But the fact remains that throughout Indian history, the *Sthānikas*, as the most influential section of the *Śaivites*, had remarkably succeeded in maintaining the dignity and power of their office all over southern and western India.

[^196_1]: Read Saletore, *Mediæval Jainism*, pp. 278-279 and passim.
