+++
title = "0518 Verse 683"

+++
> **Sanskrit text, Unicode transliteration and English translation by Ganganath Jha:** 
>
> समुच्चयादिभिन्नं तु द्रव्यमेव तथोच्यते ।  
> स्वरूपादेव भेदश्च व्याहतः साधितो भवेत् ॥ ६८३ ॥ 
>
> *samuccayādibhinnaṃ tu dravyameva tathocyate* \|  
> *svarūpādeva bhedaśca vyāhataḥ sādhito bhavet* \|\| 683 \|\| 
>
> If it is substance itself, as diversified through ‘group’, etc., that is spoken of as such,—then what the argument would prove would be the difference of substance from itself—thus involving self-contradiction.—(683)



## Kamalaśīla’s commentary (tattvasaṃgrahapañjikā):

The following *Text* shows how Number and the rest are devoid of substratum:—[*see verse 683 above*]

‘*Is spoken of as such*’;—i.e. as ‘one’, ‘two’ and so forth.

It might be argued that—“what is to be proved is the difference of Number, etc. which are only forms of Substance.”

The answer to this is—‘*What the argument would prove, etc*.’;—i.e. no entity can be different from its own form; as it would become devoid of its own character.—‘*Self-contradiction*’,—i.e. contradiction of one another; because ‘Difference’ and ‘Non-difference’, being of the nature of exclusion and inclusion, cannot co-exist in any single object.

Thus have all qualities ending with ‘Posteriority’ been rejected. The rest of the qualities (postulated by the *Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika*)—beginning with *Cognition* and ending with *effort*—have been held to subsist in the Soul. They should therefore be taken as discarded by the rejection of the Soul itself.

As a matter of fact however, the Soul cannot be the substratum of these qualities. Because the Soul could be the substratum of these, either as being the cause of their production, or as being the cause of their subsistence. It cannot be the cause of their production, because, the Cause (Soul) being always there in its perfect form, Pleasure and other effects would be produced always; nor can there be any dependence upon auxiliaries for a Cause in which no peculiar properties can be produced by anything else; as has been reiterated hundreds of times.—Nor again can an eternal Substance have the capacity of producing effects; as such production could only be either successive or simultaneous, and it has been explained that in the case of an eternal substance there is incongruity both in successive and simultaneous activity.—Nor again can the Soul be the cause of the *subsistence* (of the Qualities in question); because ‘subsistence’ has no other form than that of the ‘Subsistent’ itself; so that if the Soul were said to be the cause of *subsistence*, it would mean that it is the cause of the *subsistent* thing itself; and this idea has just been rejected. Then again, the *subsistent* thing being a well-established entity, it can have no cause at all; as there would be nothing therein that could be done by the Cause.—Even if the *subsistence* were something different from the *subsistent* thing, there could be nothing done by the cause in the latter, as it will have brought about only the *subsistence*, which *ex-hypothesi* is something different. And thus not producing anything in the *subsistent* thing, how could the Soul be its *substratum*?—Nor will it be right to urge that—“inasmuch as the Soul will have produced the *subsistence* related to the *subsistent* thing, it would be a *helper* of the latter; because the said relationship is not yet proved.—As a matter of fact, the Soul cannot be regarded as the cause of the *subsistence*; because an eternal thing can have no such causal potency,—as has been explained before.

Further, the entity (in the shape of *subsistence*) that is established (by the Soul)—would it be of permanent nature? or evanescent? If the latter, then how can it be established by something else? It would lose its character. If, on the other hand, it is permanent, then also its *establisher* (Cause) would be futile; as by its very nature, the *subsistence* would be there always.

Further, as regards *corporeal* things, it is possible to assume for them, a substratum which prevents their falling downwards; for the things in question however, which are *incorporeal*,—such as *Pleasure* and the rest,—there can be no *falling downward*; then what would the ‘substratum’ do for them?

Lastly, for what cannot be spoken of either as *existent* or as *non-existent*, there can be no *subsisting* at all.

In this manner Pleasure and other Qualities may be shown *mutatis mutandis* to be incapable of being regarded as *subsistent*; from which it follows that there can be no such thing as ‘Quality’,

Then again, *Buddhi* has beén accepted by the other party as being of the nature of *Jñāna*, Cognition,—as declared in the following *Sutra*—“*Buddhi*, *Upalabdhi*, *Jñāna*, are synonyms” (*Nyāyasūtra* 1.1.15). Even though *Buddhi* is of this nature, yet the other party have not admitted any such form of it as is apprehended by itself; in fact they regard it as apprehended by another *Buddhi*. Thus, not having a self-sufficient existence, like Colour and other things,—it cannot rightly be regarded even as *Buddhi*, This is going to be explained later on.—(683)

Pleasure, Pain, Desire, Hatred and Effort,—are Qualities that have been held to be distinct from *Cognition (Buddhi*). These we are going to reject in course of the examination of the Means of Right Cognition (Chapters 17, 18 and 19).

As regards the Qualities of Gravity, Fluidity and Viscidity,—these are to be rejected in the same way as Colour and the rest.

In view of this, the Author proceeds next to reject the Quality of *Momentum* (*Saṃskāra*):——[*see verses 684-685 next*]


