+++
title = "0"
unicode_script = "devanagari"
+++


**L E T   G O**

**DISCOVER LASTING HAPPINESS**

**TRUTHS UNFOLDED FROM UPANIṣADS**

**By**

**REVERED MASTER**

**Prof. A. SATYANARAYANA SHASTRI**

**Edited by**

**GARANI   S  RADHAKRISHNAN**



**अज्ञानतिमिरान्धस्य ज्ञानाञ्जनशलाकया ।**

**चक्षुरुन्मीलितं येन तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नमः॥**

**Ajñāna-timira-andhasyajñānāñjana-śalākayā,**

**cakṣuḥ-unmīlitaṁ yēnatasmai śrī-guravē namaḥ.**

**I offer my respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master, who has opened my eyes, which were blinded by the darkness of ignorance, with the torchlight of knowledge.**

**To**

**ALL SEEKERS OF ‘SELF’**


## Acknowledgements

A work of this type cannot happen without the effort of a group of dedicated persons. My brother Rangarajan, Prof. Naagabhushan, Mr. Gopal who had an intimate and long association with Shastriji have been the prime movers of this programme.   All the three have spent many hours with me   for realising this project by helping me with the transcription, by putting it into a readable format. They spent hours of their precious time by going through the pages line by line and made the necessary correction keeping in mind, the Shastriji’s style of narration.    My school mate Sreenivasa Murthy spent his time with me correcting the proof.  My thanks goes to all of them.

Recording of these lectures were done at Detroit, U.S.A.at the residence of Smt Aruna, daughter of Shastriji in the year 2002.  Our sincere thanks to her for providing the tapes for transcriptions.

Dr Nagendra, Vice Chancellor of Sri Vivekānanda Yoga Anusandhāna Samsthāna (SVYASA) has been a motivating force behind the project. My special thanks to him.

Transliteration work of the book was done by Dr Ishwarprasad.  My sincere thanks to him.

I have a long list of students of Shastriji to acknowledge. I cannot   forget them for their support. Prominent among them is Mr. Vinayak Joshi who has relentlessly worked to keep the record of Shastriji’s talks and shared the same.

Mr. Ranganath Prasad did the transcription work related to the talks and typing work of Sanskrit text also.   He has been a helping hand whenever I wanted him and stayed with me till the book took a final shape.  I am indebted to him.  Prof K S Shreedharan who took all the pains to correct the Sanskrit texts needs special mention here.   I thank him profusely.

Dr Lata Hemchand**,**Professor of Psychology, Richmond Fellowship Post Graduate College, 40-1/4, Vajpeyam Gardens, Bangalore who incidentally is an ardent follower of Shastriji, supported our work and very eagerly agreed to write a foreword to this book.  My sincere thanks to her.

My   publishers--------took enough pains to bring this to a  happy end within a very short time given to them.

Lastly I thank my wife Rukmiṇi whose patience I tested by working into late nights and disturbing her sleep for quite a long time.


## Preface to the second edition

In our enthusiasm to bring out the book as quickly as possible, we hurriedly rushed through the first edition in which some small but relevant aspects were left out.  In spite of this deficiency the appreciation of the contents were valuable and prompted us to take a second look at the editing work. The suggestion from the readers who were mostly the Shatriji’s core group came in handy to look at the whole manuscript again. It is prudent to mention here that the first edition saw only a hundred copies circulated among the enthusiasts.

Many changes have been made in this edition, by revising the pattern of presentation, keeping in mind not to disturb the flow of thought so that the reader gets a clear glimpse into the subject matter.  Sanskrit** **verses which were added as an appendage to each lecture has been taken off and introduced wherever the need came about along with the references to the original texts.  I hope this will be of use to the reader.  Dr Lataji’s preface has been added in this edition.  The lectures on Māṇdūkya Upaniṣad have been revised and redrafted.

I am sure the reader will benefit by these changes. Suggestions are welcome for a better presentation of future editions.

Happy Reading!

Editor.


## Editors Note

My association with this great teacher was for a very short period. I heard him directly six or seven times.  But the impact of that listening was so great that it prompted me to listen to many of his taped lectures several times.  More than six hundred hours of taped talks covering various aspects have been put into an mp3 format for better storage at the request of Mr. Vinayak Joshi who had recorded them using his little recorder. I could feel the presence of Shastriji always during that period of my listening and recording.

While I was reading the edited works of a great Mystic, a sudden inspiration came to me that I should also do some serious efforts to take up the task of bringing the audio version of the talks of Shastriji into a book form, the reason being Shastriji’s direct approach to the problem of happiness and sorrow (sukha and duḥkha), should reach many aspiring practitioners in the path of sādhana. Shastriji himself was a very serious sādhaka and was well known guide for many aspirants.  His Monday lectures at Śankarakrūpa in Bangalore was well attended and well received.

While working on this book, I was informed that Shastriji himself had expressed his intent to get these ideas brought out in the form of a book to reach out to a larger readership. His wish has now become a reality.

These lectures were delivered by Shastriji in Detroit U. S. A. during the period 2001-2002 at the request of a group of psychiatrists, doctors of medicine and doctors of science who were all in to the study of Vedānta and were longing for a deeper understanding of the siddhānta and sādhana

It was most appropriate that he took up the title of the lecture series as ‘Message of Upaniṣad-s” as he had done a deeper research into the aspects of lasting happiness which has been dealt very widely in the Upaniṣad-s.  These messages formed the nuggets to be condensed into a scientific model.  He described his own model as –calculus model-which took him a long time to develop after an in depth study into Upaniṣad-s, Śankarabhāṣya, and Yoga-Vāsiṣṭha.

Shastriji always preferred an interactive session and wanted more searching questions from his listeners and even encouraged them to throw any type of question however trivial it might look. He always used to stress that Vedānta should be introduced at a very early age of fifteen or sixteen, as that was the right age to sow the seeds of culture in young minds.  He always recommended everyone to develop a scientific temper of questioning any hypothesis till a satisfactory answer came forth and not to study Vedāntic texts in a goody goody way.

For the sake of a better understanding of the various aspects of the message of the great master, the book is divided into three major parts individually named as Siddhānta**,** Sādhana and lectures on Māṇdūkya Upaniṣad.  These are only broad sub divisions.   The concept of   Omkāra upāsana for deeper levels of spiritual advancement is the highlight of these lectures. A Few Gems from Gauḍapāda Kārikā-s which Shastriji always used to quote and asked his ardent sādhakā-s to do manana on them have been added for the benefit of the reader.  The concept of Dharma as propoununded by our R̥ṣi-s** **and misquoted by many, have been very scientifically analysed and this can be used as a tool of sādhana.

The Sanskrit śloka-s often quoted by Shastriji have been given in Devanāgari script along with references to their texts   for the benefit of reader.  The transliteration of the śloka-s have been put in bold font instead of the usual italics type for a clear reading.

If the reader is benefited from these talks, I feel the effort and pain was worth the trouble. I hope that the reading will push to inner peace and tranquility.		                                                           G.S.Radhakṛṣṇan

Bangalore. India.


## Foreword

I write this foreword with a sense of humility and gratitude to Shastriji, my Guru. He is the inspiration and spirit of this book which contains his message on wisdom from the Upaniṣad-s.

There exists a myriad of commentaries, interpretation and treatises written on Upaniṣad-s. The reader may wonder as to the significance of one more such exposition. The uniqueness of this book lies in the scientific approach to concepts like happiness and sorrow (Sukha & Duḥkha), demystifying the concept of enlightenment and liberation (Mukti) as espoused in Vedanta. Shastriji through his intense research into Upaniṣad-s and Yoga-Vāsiṣṭha found answers for the universal quest of reducing misery and enhancing lasting happiness. His objective was to bring forth this knowledge hidden in Vedanta to every spiritual seeker. Vedanta for him was an applied science which could help in realising the vagaries of our mind and bring it under conscious control. He truly believed that the psychologists of today had a lot to learn from our ancients. Having been in this field as a professional I fully validate his words.

The present book is an effort to bring together Shastriji’s seminal contributions in understanding Vedanta. His lecture series recorded in 2002 have been painstakingly transcribed and edited by Sri Garani S. Radhakrishnan, Prof. Nagabhushan, Gopal and Rangarajan. Some of the important themes which are contained in this book are the analysis of Sukha and Duḥkha using a new methodology (Prakriya) which was entirely original on Shasrtriji’s part. The association between Bhogasukha and Brahmasukha, the quintessential meaning of Omkāra and the concept of Dharma in Hindu thinking are rarely touched upon by other scholars.

The discourse that has existed so far on these concepts has predominantly confined itself to scholarly expositions and debates with little emphasis on its application to the daily life of an individual. Shastriji on the other hand took the Sadhakā-s (practitioner’s) perspective. He showed that the validity of this knowledge was established through experimenting and experiencing it oneself. For example, he showed that the quietened state of mind or “no-mind state (Amanī-Bhāva)”, is the true state of happiness or joy. This “no-mind state” can be attained through Japa, Meditation  Śubhakarma or by contemplation of one’s true nature.

Happiness or well being in psychological research has focused on two general perspectives: the hedonic approach which defines happiness in terms of sensory pleasures or attaining valued outcomes in varied realms. The second perspective is the Eudaimonic view emphasizes on meaning of life and self realization. The two perspectives are often thought of as opposing viewpoints and there is no convergence between the two approaches.

Shastriji’s analysis of happiness bridges this gap through establishing the relationship between the hedonic (Bhogasukha) and the eudaimonic (Brahma- Sukha). He explains how the content of happiness is basically reaching the ‘no-mind’ state in both the approaches, the difference lies in the fact that the bhogasukha is short lived and is dependent on external objects while Brahma-Sukha is an internal state independent of external agencies which the person can experience at will and hence, long lasting. **This extraordinary message of making a notional shift from focusing on the agency (what brings happiness) to the content (the mental state during the happy experience) has not been conveyed by any other scholar of Vedānta thus far.**

His research on human suffering lead him to simplify the understanding of sorrow in two phases of the mind namely speed and intense focusing or ‘Coning’ as he called it. He clarified that all the disturbances of the mind are caused by its constant gyrations and fast vibration (spandana). He quotes from the Bhagavad-Ġīta to prove this point (chapter-5, verse-23), “man can be happy only when he is able to drop the speed arising out of desire, fear and anger”. Thus the common factor present in all moments of distress is speed, agitation and unruliness of forces inside.

The second dimension of sorrow he summarized as intense focusing where one reduces oneself to a single point or the mental posture acquires ‘coning phase’. When a person is experiencing a deep loss or constant worry, the mind acquires highest density and the person feels burdened. He loses his expansive and diffused state which is his true nature.

Such piercing clarity in the understanding of sorrow and happiness has not been achieved by any scholar before Shastriji. This vision can have great impact not only on the field of spirituality but in the mental health field where scientists are grappling with this eternal quest of reducing distress and promoting greater happiness. Hence, this book can be a resource for all those different fields of knowledge like philosophy, psychology and spirituality which delve into man’s quest for happiness.

As a practioner in the field of clinical Psychology, I have applied these principles with several of my clients who are receptive to such ideas and found them highly effective. The suggestion of reducing speed and slowing down mental activity to reduce distress has had the maximum impact on clients with anxiety and depression. One of the tormenting symptoms of these two conditions is an incessant, forceful rush of irrational and often negative thoughts. Creating awareness in them that pain and suffering is nothing but mental speed, the negative thoughts lose their intensity due to slow down. Clients find great relief after practicing this method.

A second category of clients who benefit using Shastriji’s suggestions are those suffering from obsessive compulsive disorder. Their obsessions are associated with certain religious beliefs and rituals which they follow to an extent that it starts harming them and affects the quality of their life. Exploring the true meaning of all these rituals as ‘Śubhakarma’ and showing the aim of Śubhakarma is to quieten the mind (Cittaśuddhi), they are freed from the torture of guilt and fear of being punished by God. This results in a reduction in their symptoms.

These examples are only a few among many more such applications of intervening effectively to resolve mental health problems. Rather than following western models of therapy which is generally the norm among professionals, Shastriji’s wisdom and insights inspire us to be innovative and create an Indian model of Therapy. It would be culturally more appropriate and Indian clients would probably internalize it more easily.

Omkāra Upāsana is extolled repeatedly in the Upaniṣad-s and prescribed as a superior path towards enlightenment. However, it was Shastriji who unraveled the hidden meaning about how the utterance of ‘Om’ represents the microcosm and the macrocosm of the universe. Further, he indicated that the Sādhaka could merge into deep silence through Omkāra Upāsana.

The concept of enlightenment or self realization has been demystified by Shastriji using the calculus model which has an appeal to modern scientific mind.

Finally, Shastriji’s brilliant exposition of Dharma in Hindu thinking is a jewel in the crown. He relates different episodes in Hindu mythology which seemingly appear inconsistent with ethical considerations but have a deeper meaning of achieving a calmer and quietened state of mind,  thus, resulting in** **śāśvata sukha. He differentiates between concepts of nyāya and Dharma. He propagates a new definition of Dharma based on his research as;’ an act done in the background of ‘Cittaśuddhi ‘or for the expansion of citta is Dharma’.

Shastriji’s message contained in this book endeavours to communicate deep spiritual wisdom from the Upaniṣad-s without the overload of academic discourse. It has been rendered in a scientific manner with an emphasis on the experiential and Sādhana perspective. It can quench the thirst for higher spiritual wisdom among readers from across different disciplines of knowledge and different continents.

**Dr. Lata Hemchand,**

Professor of Psychology,

Richmond Fellowship Post Graduate College,

40-1/4, Vajpeyam Gardens, Bangalore.


## Why read this book?

In what way this book is special in content and quality is a natural question that arises in the mind of any reader.  Hence it is the responsibility of the editor to highlight the salient features of this book.

Shastriji, with a strong scientific temper, began to question the orthodoxy in respect of certain vedāntic truths cherished by traditional scholars.  This led him to do intense research in Upaniṣad-s and Yoga- Vāsiṣṭa in order to find practical solutions to the problems encountered by the modern mind.

Some of his important findings which form the theme of this book are listed here:



* <u>Analysis_ _of Mind_:_</u>  All modifications of the mind are nothing but mere Spandana (movement). Human suffering can be reduced to only two aspects of mind--speed and focusing.
* <u>Happiness_:_</u> Mystery regarding happiness is removed by identifying and equating the quietened state of mind itself as happiness glorified in the Upaniṣad-s.
* <u>Sukha-Duḥkha Parīkṣa</u>:  A prakriya is a methodology which guides a person to understand and arrive at the true nature of the Self or Ātmān. There are traditional prakriyā-s like Avasthā Traya Parīkṣa, Pañca Kośa Viveka, Sthūla Sūkṣma Viveka etc.  Shastriji devised the prakriya called Sukha-Duḥkha Parīkṣa by which one can understand his   true ‘SELF’
* <u>Bhogasukha--Brahmasukha</u>: Quoting from Śankarabhāṣya and Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad-s, the role played by bhoga (enjoyment through the senses) in the experience of happiness is explained.   It is shown that CONTENTWISE Bhogasukha is essentially the same as Brahmasukha. Seeking magnified version of this happiness or Ānanda, sans the agencies, is Brahmābhāyasa.
* <u>Energy shift mechanism</u>: This explains why and how one experiences joy or happiness when sense organs come in contact with sense objects.
* <u>Omkāra Upāsana</u>:   Perhaps, Shastriji is the only one who has taken the logical explanation of Omkāra given by Adi Śankara in his commentary on Māṇḍukya Upaniṣad.  He shows how this upāsana can lead a sādhaka to slip into deep silence.
* <u>Śubhakarma_:  _</u>Shastriji classifies all mundane, mechanical, neutral, non exciting activities like sweeping the floor, washing dishes etc as Śubhakarma and explains how these activities can help in attaining purification of mind.
* <u>Freedom element_:_</u>  He identifies that freedom is a unique and special quality of a human mind and this facility can be used to overcome the feeling of helplessness and bondage.
* <u>Boredom forces</u>:  Identifies boredom as anādyavidyā. By using the energy shift mechanism it is shown how boredom is generated and how it can be overcome.
* <u>Concept of Brahman</u>: Demystifies the concept of Brahman and concept of enlightenment. The modern scientific mind cannot appreciate the traditional model of creation according to which the universe has come into being by an utterly non doing principle called Brahman.  An attempt has been made by this scholar in overcoming this hurdle by using Calculus model.  This needs careful consideration by modern scientists.  According to Shastriji, enlightenment cannot happen overnight as it is a gradual process.
* Siddhānta and Sādhana_:_  It is shown that vedāntic truths need not remain as traditional jargons.  Most of them can be applied as a means of sādhana to reach the goal.

Quoting examples from day to day problems faced by men and women  in their daily life, he goes on to show how everyone  can lead a happy life if one were to understand how and why of the rules laid down by our ancestors for living one’s complete life.  Drawing many quotes from Upaniṣad-s, Yoga-Vāsiṣṭha and Bhagavad-Ġīta, he has shown that by sādhana one can attain bliss in this very life itself.


