+++
title = "04 HOW TO CROSS THE *LONGUE DURÉE*: TEXTS \\+ ETHNOGRAPHY"

+++

For the historical study of ritual, that is over the *longue durée*, it is necessary to have recourse to texts. Philippe Buc has claimed, however, that dependence solely upon texts is methodologically problematic “because we do not have access to ritual practices, but only to texts depicting them \(a given that renders impossible from the very start the use of certain kinds of anthropological models\).”93 This is, however, one of the things that makes the *homa* especially valuable for the longitudinal study of ritual change.94 First, there is an extensive ritual literature specifically on the *homa*—including not only descriptions but also prescriptions, that is, ritual manuals. This literature continues for well-over a millennium and a half, is found throughout the tantric world, and in several of the languages of that world. And, second, this literary record is complemented by several living religious traditions in which the *homa* continues to be performed. These traditions are found in quite different religious cultures and are available for observation as a publicly performed ritual. It seems entirely plausible that were a ninth-century Śaivite tantrika to somehow observe a *homa* performed in the Shingon temple in Sacramento, California, on a New Year’s morning in the twenty-first century he would recognize it as a variant of the ritual with which he was already intimately familiar.

Catherine Bell has noted that the need for context in understanding texts, including ritual ones, is now commonly accepted—“a text should not be approached in isolation or abstraction from the historical milieu in which it was written.”95 She goes on, however, to raise additional important questions about the relation between textualization and ritualization, which are left unanswered even by a focus on a text’s context. These constitute

a more underlying set of questions. What is the significance or functional effect of writing ritual down, both vis-à-vis ritual and as a written text? How does writing a text or depicting ritual in a text act upon the social relations involved in textual and ritual activities? Ultimately, how are the media of communication creating a situation rather than simply reflecting it; how are they restructuring social interactions rather than merely expressing them?96

Understanding the textual record of the *homa* over several centuries is a necessary step toward answering Bell’s questions—whether these questions are directed toward the contemporary academic describing a ritual observed, or toward someone working in a traditional milieu in which a ritual manual or canonic source prescribing a ritual performance was created.

While many different kinds of textual records may be of use, probably the most extensive body of textual material directly related to ritualized practices is to be found in ritual manuals and prescriptive scriptural texts along with their commentaries. The detailed information regarding ritual performance found in such texts is examined in several of the essays in this collection.

Ritual manuals and prescriptive scriptures are, of course, not without difficulties as resources for the study of ritual. Regarding the materials related to the shift from Vedic to Brahmanic ritual, Timothy Lubin notes that the prescriptive texts “are anonymous works of uncertain provenance and date, probably composite in origin, and inadequately edited in their standard published forms.”97 Another issue, noted by Geoffrey Samuel in his discussion of the textual sources dating from the origin of tantra, is that “the relationship between text and practice in the material is often oblique.”98

Both ritual manuals and prescriptive scriptures share the problem that their authors assume a great deal of knowledge that the contemporary reader may not have as part of their own cultural experience or religious training. At a very basic level, for example, it is not uncommon for ritual manuals to simply identify ritual elements, such as mantra and *mudrā*, by a name, rather than describing in full or \(literally\) spelling out. The author of the ritual manual assumes that the practitioner is already trained and knows how to perform the necessary *mudrā*, or knows how to recite the mantra as required at some particular point in the ritual. In some cases, a mantra may not even be identified as a mantra, but simply by its name, such as “astra.”99

Prescriptive scriptural sources may be even more obscure, taking for granted either what was common knowledge at the time, but which is no longer commonly known, or in other cases polemic debates unknown to the reader in the present. The Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi sūtra, for example, has a chapter discussing different kinds of *homa* fires.100 Why? What is this about? Presumably it has to do with other votive practices employing fires that were contemporaneous to the cult of the text itself. But what practices?, whose practices?101

Similarly obscure is the description of an “internal *homa*” that closes this chapter of the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi sūtra:


Next, internal homa extinguishes karma and \[re\]birth.

Understanding one’s own manas \(mind\), one dissociates oneself from form, sound, and so on.

The eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and body, as well as verbal and mental action,

All arises entirely from the mind and depend upon the mind-king.

The eyes and so on, born of differentiation, as well as the objective realms of form and so on,

Obstacles to wisdom unborn, the Wind-parched Fire is able to extinguish.

It burns away false differentiation and accomplishes the pure bodhi-mind.

This is called internal homa, and it has been taught for bodhisattvas.102


Is this a prescription for visualizing oneself performing a *homa* ritual? What is the “wind-parched fire?” Is it pointing to contemplation of the mind itself as an alternative to ritual performance?103 An additional difficulty is that in such instances any commentaries may be of limited utility or reliability. The author of the commentary may be separated from the author/s of the scripture by both time and culture. Continuing with our example, there are two major commentaries on the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi sutra, one by the eighth-century Indian monk Buddhaguhya \(commentary dates from 760\), and the other by the Chinese monk Yi Xing \(683–727\). A commentator such as Buddhaguhya working a century or more after the compilation of the tantra in India may still be familiar with the tradition of practice constellated in the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi, but has perhaps already lost touch with the polemic context \(or, alternatively may know it so well as to assume it does not require explanation\). Similarly, although Yi Xing’s commentary is no doubt rooted in his work with Śubhakarasiṃha in translating the text into Chinese and is historically closer to the probable origin of the sutra in the mid-seventh century, his own religious culture is distinct from that of the text’s author\(s\).

Despite these kinds of difficulties, the textual record provides us with the most important source we have for studying the dynamics of ritual change, including adaptations across religious cultures, over a wide historical horizon.104 The methodologies of textual studies are well established and can be brought to bear for the study of ritual over the *longue durée*. What is necessary, however, is that the kinds of questions asked of the texts shift from the still common focus on doctrinal matters to matters of ritual and practice. Changing the questions being asked will also entail a change in the kinds of textual materials examined, as well as a change in the background knowledge for research of this kind. Answering questions about ritual and practice will require a shift in the knowledge base a researcher brings to the study from the not uncommon emphasis on familiarity with doctrine to pragmatic considerations of ritual as an embodied performance taking place in a specific social setting at a particular time, that is, ethnography.

One of the characteristics of ritual frequently commented on is specifically the fact that a ritual performance involves a wide range of sensory modalities and is therefore more than “a text.” Discussing the role of ritual in moral formation, David Solomon et al. emphasize that “rituals as repeated, stylized bodily movements and/or statements bring together symbols, emotions, and moral commitments.”105 Discussing the ritual cycle of the Maring living in the Central Highlands of New Guinea, Rappaport similarly emphasizes that to participate in a ritual is not an action symbolic of something else, such as a commitment to ally with a group in its next war, “participation *indicates* membership. It does not simply symbolize it.”106

The study of the *homa* could also be furthered through additional methodologies, such as archaeology, art history, and epigraphy. Although not included here, we can hope that this collection will stimulate scholars in those areas to attend to the *homa* specifically and ritual more generally. Each of these can contribute to the historical understanding of tantric ritual. Archaeology and epigraphy have been recognized as important sources by many scholars in the years since 1991, when Gregory Schopen published “Archaeology and Protestant Presuppositions in the Study of Indian Buddhism.”107 In an important contribution to the historical study of Buddhist tantra, Ronald Davidson has put these sources to good use in his *Indian Esoteric Buddhism*.108 Unfortunately, some scholars have unnecessarily bifurcated the study of Buddhism between a putatively “real” Buddhism reflected in archaeology and epigraphy in opposition to a supposedly artificial or contrived representation created from texts. However, particularly in tropical areas not conducive to the preservation of written texts because of mold and insects, the archaeological record can be the crucial piece in establishing alternatives to the “authorized” histories constructed for sectarian and political ends. Andrea Acri’s studies, together with those of Jeffrey Sundberg,109 P. D. Sharrock, and Arlo Griffiths,110 draw heavily on archaeological information and have demonstrated its importance in uncovering the otherwise obscured history of tantric Buddhism in Southeast Asia. Art history also provides an additional resource for understanding the history of Buddhism in ways outside the textual, ritual, archaeological, or epigraphic.


