+++
title = "02"

+++

The second chapter begins with a brief presentation of anupāya. Anupāya is not counted under any upaya on account of its subtlety, and even more, because the person on whom the most intense descent of grace (śaktipāta) has fallen does not have any need for internal or external help in order to realize his identity with śiva. The word of the teacher, heard only once, places him on the transcendent path (anuttara-patha), the stable ground of the blissful nature of śakti, upon which he at once realizes the self-manifest Lord as his own very Self.+++(4)+++ 

śiva is eternal; therefore there is no possibility of realizing Him by any means (upāya). As He is self-manifest, the means can not add anything to Him. If it is said that some means would assist in the removal of the veils, then this is untenable, for there is no ultimate existence of any of the veils. In the same way, the question of the merger of the one into the other cannot stand, for there is the total absence of two separate entities. This chain of reason able arguments causes a firm conviction to manifest in the aspirant.+++(5)+++ As a result of this conviction, he realizes that the Absolute, the mass of bliss, is the single Truth, and that śiva is the universal "I am He" in whom everything shines inseparably in the mirror of consciousness. Thus, when firmly contemplated, he finds himself in absorption, in oneness, with the divine. 

In the Tantrāloka, Jayaratha comments that in the śāmbhava, śākta, and āṇava upayas, there is a possibility that duality may arise because of the functioning of icchā, jñāna, and kriyā śaktis; for example, iccha becomes externally inclined because of the presence of something desirable (eṣaṇīya) in the core of icchā.+++(4)+++ On the other hand, in anupāya, because of the functioning of ānanda Śakti, which is said to be Brahman Himself, there is not even a tint of an upāya existing as separate from it.+++(5)+++ 
