+++
title = "04"

+++

The highest end for human beings is to attain the very nature of Parāmaśiva, who is ever free from determinacy or “thought constructs” (vikalpa). One is able to rid oneself of thought constructs by means of pure reasoning (sat-tarka), by listening to holy texts known as āgamas, and by following the teachings of a spiritual teacher. The practice of contemplating or viewing everything as the essential reality (śiva) is the means by which one is able to rise above impure thought constructs (aśuddha-vikalpas). The tantrasāra states that one considers oneself bound because of vikalpas. The wrong conception of one's true nature as body, etc., is the cause of mundane existence; however, when a vikalpa of the opposite nature pure “thought construct" (śuddha-vikalpa) is born, it dispels the wrong kind of thought construct, places one on the right path, and enables one to attain the highest good. 

Though pure thought constructs are of no avail in revealing the nature of Parāmaśiva, the supreme reality, for it is everywhere and in every way ever luminous, it is the considered opinion of the author that pure vikalpas remove the sense of duality from the Self.+++(4)+++ The sense of duality is not something positive, but is only ignorance (akhyāti) of one's essential nature. This sense of duality is removed by pure thought constructs (śuddha-vikalpa). 

Pure knowledge (śuddha-vidya) leads to sattarka, or pure reasoning. One should bear in mind that sat-tarka is distinct from the form of gross reasoning as understood in the Nyāya system, for it is said that sat-tarka arises by itself in a person whom śakti has keenly touched.+++(4)+++ This tarka leads to the continuity of ideas similar to śuddha-vikalpa. It is stated in the Tantrasāra: The supreme reality is unlimited by nature and consists of an undivided singularity of consciousness. It transcends all the principles of limited nature which terminate in śiva. This renders stability to all and is the vitality of universe. Through it the universe "throbs" with life, and that is “I” (aham).+++(5)+++ 

The continuous practice of sat-tarka regarding the nature of reality brings about the purity of "thought constructs.". The highest excellence of sattarka terminates in bhāvanā, by which one is able to make manifest as distinct even the most indistinct. 

In some, sattarka may arise by itself, without the need for recourse to any spiritual guide or the reading of holy texts. When it is enlivened in a person, he is considered to have been initiated by the luminous goddesses of his own consciousness (samvid-devis), the deities personifying consciousness itself.+++(5)+++ 

However, the person on whom the grace of the Lord has descended less keenly should be initiated by the spiritual teacher, after which he is able to secure the right of listening to āgamas, which by their proper understanding help one to become free from doubts. Afterwards, the truth that is contained in the āgama gives rise to sattarka in him. 

Sat-tarka is the light of "pure knowledge" (śuddha-vidyā). It is considered to be the most excellent and direct limb of yoga.+++(5)+++ It is stated in the Tantra-sāra that yoga is also a kind of vikalpa, but that it is characterized by intensive awareness (anusandhānātmā) regarding essential reality. For the purpose of keeping the essential reality ever luminous in his view, the yogin takes recourse to this form of vikalpa for the maturity of his awareness. 

Parameśvara is by nature pure consciousness and is ever full. His fullness is His śakti, the Divine I-consciousness.+++(4)+++ By the grace of śuddha-vidyā, one has recourse to cit śakti, which finally leads the aspirant to śambhu, the Lord. 
