+++
title = "13"

+++
Here the author explains the necessity of and reasons for the ritual procedures that are to be performed on hilltops, river banks, and other holy spots. Though those places are considered to be auspi cious, they are really external, and thus of little help for attaining siddhis, in contrast to the internal seats (pithas), which are much more useful, because they concentrate the vital energy in differ ent locations in the body, and through this one is able to attain 

INTRODUCTION 35 

liberation. Just as there are many sacred places existing externally, in the same way, there are many sacred places located inside the human body, and are divided into groups known as pītha, upapi tha, sandohaka, kṣetra, and upakṣetra. The group of pithas con sists of three sacred locations: kāmarūpa, pūrṇagiri, and uddi yana. The kāmarūpa pitha is of the form of iccha; the other two are of the nature of nāda and bindu, respectively, and have their locations at the right and left side of the body. The following chart shows further details: 

(b) Upapīṭhas are three . 

1. Devikoṭṭa: śākta 2. Ujjayini: Bindu 

3. Kulagiri: Výāpini (c) Sandohaka are also three 

1. Pundravardhana: Lālana 2. Vārendra: Vaindava 

3. Ekāmra: Vyāpti (d) Kșetra are the petals of the heart lotus 

1. Prayāga 2. Varanā 3. Attahāsa 4. Jayantikā 

5. Vārāṇasi 6. Kālinga 7. Kulūtā 8. Lāhulā (e) Upakṣetra: the eight tips of the lotus 

1. Viraja 2. Erudikā 3. Hālā 4. Elāpūh 

5. Kșīrikā 6. Puri 7. Māyāpuri 8. Marudesa (f) Upasandohaka are the junctures of the eight petals of the 

heart lotus with the center 

1. Jālandhara 2. Naipāla 3. Kaśmīrā 4. Gargikā 5. Haraḥ 6. Mlecchadigdvāravrtti 7. Kuruksetra 8. Khetaka 

Although outer sacred places are of no help in attaining release, they are suitable places for worship, because deities who are well versed in jñāna and yoga are born there and have sanctified the place. Moreover, by staying in those places, devoted people may become recipients of jñāna and yoga; therefore, aspirants make pilgrimages to sacred places. The author further clarifies that such places are to be selected as the setting for rituals as they bestow satisfaction to the heart lotus. 

36 TANTRASĀRA 

For the purpose of worship, one should attain the state of a pure heart and stand outside the ritual space and perform nyāsa with either the matļkā or malini orders of the Sanskrit alphabet, or both. 

The nyāsa of mātṣkā is performed in the following way: forehead - a 

right shoulder- k mouth - ā eyes 

- ili 

forearm 

hand 

ears 

u/ū 

finger 

nails nostrils s/ļī. . left shoulder cheeks' .. .!/l. 

left arm teeth . elai hand 

fingers 

nails lip upper - : 

right hip lip lower - 

thigh top of 

the head - 

foot tip of the 

tongue - 

fingers 

nails left hip 

right and left thigh 

arm pit foot 

back finger 

belly nails 

heart skin 

bones nails meat 

sukra majja 

prāṇakoṣa The nyasa of mālini is: nprīl ļī th c dh i ṇu ū b k kh g gh n i a v bh y d dh ţh jh 

n jr tp ch 1 a s ahh o ks m < am t e ai ở au d ph. 

fat 

INTRODUCTION 37 

Performing nyasa with the mālini order is quite different from mātrkā nyāsa. Nyāsa is performed first in the fingers, which is followed by nyāsa in the body. Mālini and mātskā both are śiva and śakti by nature. The supreme form of śiva in this tradition is Bhairava; the mass of phonemes (sabdarāśi) is contained indivis ibly and inseparably within Himself. This sabdarāśi is also śakti Herself, because it is she who, like a mother, gives birth to her creation in its differentiated forms; therefore, she is called mātrkā, the mother. Mālini is put on by the Rudras like a mala, or gar land, by which they bestow enjoyment and liberation. In deriving the word mala, the author says that the phoneme "ma" represents saṁhara; that is, withdrawal. The phoneme “ra” means granting, and since "ra" and "la” are identical, “la” means to receive. 

Nyāsa should be performed in order to bring into predomi nance the śākta body in the worshipper. It is done in the sacrifi cial vessel (arghapatra). The teacher (ācārya) then purifies all the articles of worship with a few drops of water from the arghapatra. After worshipping the external deities outside the door, the ācārya enters within and watches the interior with the vision of the Lord. If the disciple is desirous of release, the ācārya sits facing north; if otherwise, he sits facing east. The highest light of conscious ness is the middle, from which the other directions proceed. Just as the Lord manifests the respective distinctions of directions, so does the sun. It is the sun which represents the Lord's jñāna śakti. While deciding directions, one should think of the unity of the three-namely, the self, the sun, and the Lord-as coalesced into one. It is followed by the ritual practice of burning of the physical and the subtle bodies, and by this relinquishing I-consciousness in the physical body. However, it should be pointed out that the physical body is not actually burned; rather, offerings represent ing the body, etc. are consigned to the fire. Afterwards, whatever remain as ashes are regarded as nothing but the residual traces of the former bodies. 

Then, the acārya should remain steady in the state of pure consciousness. It is like a tranquil sea from where the creative 

38 TANTRASĀRA 

consciousness (sasvit) begins to break into waves. The first cre ative impulse of consciousness causes the pure body to rise. This newly born body is characterized by the unlimited power of Bhai rava. This body is really the supreme form (para mūrti) of the Lord and is characterized by the mantra "om ham." Other nyāsas are performed so that all the tattvas may rise there. All the śaktis associated with nine principles are to be worshipped, after which the sixfold nyāsa follows. 

There are five states, namely, waking (jāgrat), dream (svapna), deep sleep (suṣupti), the fourth (turya), and beyond the fourth (turiyātīta); but anuttara is beyond them all. This is called the state or condition of one's own nature (svabhāvadasā). These states have Brahma, .Viṣṇu, Rudra, īśvara, Sadaśiva, and śiva as their lords, and are thus are associated with the real cause of thirty-six categories. Because of this, when nyāsa is performed in the body, the entire universe becomes one with the real cause of the tattvas, from which pure creation begins to manifest. Mūrti nyasa and other practices are performed only for the purpose of attaining nonduality. 

It may be asked: Is there any use of further nyāsa after the burning of the body once one has attained steadiness in tranquil śiva? To answer this question, the author states that śiva is not a static reality that is entirely separate, transcendent, and excluded from all the other tattvas. Rather, śiva is the great light of con sciousness which shines in multifarious forms. 

After consecrating the body, the worshipper then performs sulabja nyāsa in the vital energy. One should think of earth, water, fire, and wind elements as located above, and supporting the energy which is situated four digits below the navel. One digit each is occupied by earth and the others. The bulb (kanda) is supposed to be like a boat that helps one cross the ocean. The air abides there, and the sky is lying within it. Then the worshipper thinks of the staff named ananta going up to lambikā, the aper ture below the palate (tālurandhra). It contains all the tanmātras, subtle elements, etc. Above it is the knot of māyā, where four legs 

INTRODUCTION 39 

of the simhāsana, in the form of a lion, stand. Dharma, jñāna, vairagya, and aiśvarya assume these forms, whereas adharma, ajñāna, avairagya, and anaiśvarya are the joining planks. They occupy southeast, southwest, northwest, and northeast, respec tively; adharma and others occupy the east, south, west, and north. 

Above māya and below the trident, the simhasana is covered with two sheets of cloth: the lower one represents māyā for veil ing the real nature of manifestation, and the upper one is for the purpose of covering māyā itself. The worshipper then meditates on the vidyā lotus; that is, śuddhavidyā as a white lotus. Its pet als are occupied by the śaktis known as vāmā and others, with Brahma, Visnu, and Rudra representing creation, maintenance, and dissolution. Object of knowledge (meya), knowledge (māṇa), and subject (matr) are superintending, seated on three mandalas, one above the other, from lambikā onward. īśvara is located above Rudra, and further above, Sadāśiva is lying, like a corpse, but he is ever awake and is of the nature of reflecting nāda, primal sound. Three lotuses have grown from his navel, consisting of a three pronged trident, piercing three apertures of His head; the trident is of the nature of nadanta and made luminous by the three śaktis, i.e., śakti, vyāpini, and samanā. Above them is the aunmanasa, where one should meditate on the supreme Goddess as having been made of all the tattvas as her seat. In the process of worship, one offers the entire universe to her. Meditation (dhyāna), mantra rep etition (japa), etc., are to be performed internally. 

This is followed by external rituals. If the disciple desires ini tiation, he is given consecratory rites (adhivāsana). This is per formed in order to make him worthy to receive various saṇskāras, and to cause the deity to become intent on him. 

Then the author explains in detail how adhivāsana is performed. It is to be noted here that both guru and the disciple pass the night in the place of adhivāsana. If the disciple sees any inauspicious dream, he reports it to the teacher the next morning. The teacher then allays the inauspicious elements by performing certain rituals. 

Then, the teacher worships the Lord. When this is complete,40 TANTRASĀRA 

the teacher enters inside the body of the disciple by the outlet of the prāṇa in order to come in contact with the six presiding dei ties located in the six centers. Then, meditating on the forty-eight samskāras, rites are performed in the body of the "newly born child"; that is, the disciple, through contact with Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Isvara. Sadāśiva, and śiva, located in the hrdaya, kantha, tālu, ghrumadhya, lalata, and brahmarandhra, respectively. The eight rites of purification are meditated upon differently in each of the six centers. Thus the number becomes complete, and as a result the disciple becomes twice born (dvīja). Then, causing the prāṇa of the disciple to rest in the respective places for a while, the teacher comes out and gives him the mantra along with flow- · ers. Then he tells him the code of conduct (samaya) which he should follow as long as he lives. 
