+++
title = "20"

+++

The present section discusses the disciple's obligations, known as sesavartana, the duties that should be carried out until the end of his life. These duties are of three kinds: obligatory (nitya), occasional (naimittika), and kāmya, those performed for the fulfillment of some desire. 

The nitya procedure is described in the following way: One should get up early in the morning and call to mind one's desired deity first. After completing his essential activities, like wash ing, etc., and cleansing himself, he should take his seat facing north. He then purifies his body, the place where he sits, and his mind. Then he performs nyāsa upon the appropriate places with the mantra, followed by displaying an appropriate mudrā. Then he performs dhyāna in two ways: first, abiding in duality, and then in a mixed dual-nondual way. Next, mental worship of the deity is performed in the body, then in prāṇa, in the intellect, and finally in the void (vyoma). This is followed by japa, and finally the completed sequence of worship is offered to the deity. All this is to be performed every day, in every sandhya, for the purpose of achieving identification with the deity. Four sandhyas have been mentioned in Chapter Six. According to the author, through medi tation during sandhya, endless absorption (anantatanmayi bhāva) in the Supreme comes about, which.in turn gives birth to a lasting state. 

The worshipper should worship his deity in the altar (sthandila). He should view it as a clear sky with the characteristics of consciousness, where all the deities are shining as reflected therein. Viewing bare open ground really signifies invocation (āvāhana). This practice ensures that the disciple identifies with the desired deity and the highest mantra. 

Invocation of the all-pervading Lord is not possible; only desire (vāsanā) for the Lord is invoked and drawn within, since the great Lord can neither be invoked or withdrawn. 

The person who is totally absorbed in the highest mantra in the way stated above becomes free from the stains of animal proclivi ties and is finally able to put an end to all bonds by the blow of bhakti. After that, whatever remains is the most agreeable object for the worshipper. 

Then, the author describes the activities related to the parvas, which are performed occasionally by the disciple. 
