+++
title = "0"

+++
## Contents    
Illustrations vii  Preface ix  Acknowledgments xiii  Abbreviations xv  
INTRODUCTION  
Locating the Tradition 3  
CHAPTER ONE  
Ritual and Human Powers 22  
CHAPTER TWO  
Oscillation in the Ritual Universe 42  
CHAPTER THREE  
Becoming a Siva 83  
CHAPTER FOUR  
Summoning the Lord 112  
CHAPTER FIVE  
Relations of Worship 137  CONCLUSION 163  
Notes 165  Glossary 181  Selected Bibliography 189  Index 195 
  

## Illustrations    
### FIGURES  
1. Emission and reabsorption of the tattvas 43  2. Imposition of mantras onto the hand 49  3. Locations of domains 54  4. Subtle anatomy and domains 56  5. Diagrams for establishing pots 65  6. Siva's entourages 67  7. Transfer of five kalas to the pasasutra 97  8. Siva's supports 122  9. Divine throne and divine body 127  
10. Locations of the twelve kalas 130  11. ThemeetingofworshiperandSiva 135  

### PLATES  
{following page 74)  
1. Nataraja (Rajaraja Museum, Thanjavur)  
2. Imposition of brahmamantras onto the hands  
3. Imposition of brahmamantras onto the worshiper  
4. Ejection of the attributes  
5. Imposition of brahmamantras onto the linga  
6. Ascending pronunciation and invocation 
  

## Preface    
IN THIS ESSAY, I attempt to take seriously a simple postulate that seems to  me fundamental to the study of ritual: that those who compose and perform  the ritual are conscious and purposeful agents actively engaged in a world  they themselves constitute, in large measure, through their practices of  knowing and acting.  

The "world" in which Saiva ritual takes place is not the familiar world of  Western science or "common sense" that modern Westerners often believe  common to all people. Nor does it occur in some sociologically defined uni verse of a particular community or society, as social anthropology might  portray. Rather, Saiva liturgy is performed in a world that is ontologically  organized and constituted by Saiva siddhanta: a world that oscillates, that is  permeated by the presence of Siva, in which humans live in a condition of  bondage, and where the highest aim of the human soul is to attain liberation  from its fetters. Within that world, the Saiva worshiper acts with and upon  forces, objects, and categories that are defined for him by Saiva ontology,  and his goals in practicing ritual are based on the possibilities and purposes  of human attainment depicted in Saiva soteriology.  

My aim in this study is to explicate, insofar as I am able, both the world  envisioned in Saiva siddhanta and the way in which daily worship reflects  and acts within that world. This world is assuredly not the one we think we  live in, but nevertheless it is a world we can enter, partially and temporarily,  through a mental "reenactment," as R. G. Collingwood put it. The Saivas  themselves would call it bhavana, "imaginative re-creation." For the  Saivas, as for Collingwood, this reconstructive praxis is primarily intellec tual and rational, rather than simply a matter of empathy. By rethinking  ourselves the convictions and intentions a well-versed Saiva ritualist of the  twelfth century would have brought to his daily practice, we can mentally  place ourselves in his temple and reenact his worship of Siva.  

To enter that world, it will be necessary to attend to two different modes  of discourse in Saiva literature: the propositional discourse of philosophical  knowledge (jMna) and the practical discourse of ritual action (kriya). These  are, in the Saiva view, integral and necessary to one another. According to  the Saiva siddhanta tradition, a Saiva agama should have four sections or  "feet" (padas) to be a complete, self-standing treatise. One section, the  jhanapada, describes how the world is; it sets forth, in metaphysical and  theological terms, the fundamental order of the universe as envisioned by  Saiva siddhanta. A second section, the kriyapada, prescribes how one  should conduct oneself in that world, utilizing the most powerful and effica-χ · Preface    

cious forms of action. (The other two sections, dealing with yogic discipli nary practices [yogapada] and proper day-to-day conduct [carydpada], are  also necessary but clearly subordinate in importance to the first two.) And  just as jnanapada and kriyapada are equally necessary to a complete  agama, Saiva authors insist that an aspirant who wishes to advance within  the world of Siva must exert himself both to know that world and to act  properly and effectively within it.  

Unfortunately, the applicability of this principle to my own study was not  always so apparent to me. When I first began to study the Saiva agamas, I  was like a commentator whom Ramakantha criticizes. In his own commentary  on the Matangaparame&varagama, Ramakantha contrasts himself with this  other, unnamed commentator of the same text who ended his explication  after the jnanapada.  

A certain commentator who knew only philosophy completed an extensive exam ination of the knowledge section (Jnanapada), and altogether disregarded the  three practical sections concerning ritual action, yoga, and proper conduct.  Whereas I, honoring the Lord Siva, will here compose a lucid exposition of those  sections as well, because the types of action prescribed here conform (anuga)  completely with the meanings of the philosophical discourse.  

He was engaged only by philosophy; I was concerned solely with ritual. As  a historian interested in temple ritual and its relation to medieval Indian po litical formations, I wished to read only those practical portions of the  agamas dealing with kriya, and not waste time with what I considered spec ulative metaphysics. I believed I would be able to discern the significance  of medieval Saiva ritual texts directly by locating them in the context of the  social and political structures of medieval South India. I was certainly mis taken in this presumption.  

To be fair to myself, the commentator that Ramakanfha criticized and I are  not the only ones ever to have pursued such shaky, one-legged inquiries. In  fact, the large majority of scholarly studies dealing with Indian rituals make  no recourse to the philosophical foundations on which the rituals are based.  They characteristically present Indian rituals as instances of highly elaborate  routinized behavior either divorced from any formative consciousness or  based on severely flawed apprehensions of the world. On the other side, it  is only the rare study of an Indian philosophical school that makes any ex tended reference to such practical corollaries as modes of proper conduct or  ritual activity. Scholars most often portray Hindu theology as the exercise of  great intellectual ingenuity with little or no concern for practical conse quence. So in focusing my attention on only one limb of the body of thought  and action I wished to study, I was simply following the habitude of my  scholarly field. 

Preface · xi    

As I commenced reading the account of daily worship in Kamikagama,  however, I soon realized that I was missing something. At first I saw it as  a problem of terminology or technical language. What were the five kalas,  or the twelve kalas, or the thirty-eight kalas, to which the text kept refer 

ring? Who were the VidyeSvaras, the Man<Jale§varas, and numerous other su perhuman characters who periodically showed up in the ritual terrain? What  did it mean for the worshiper to "make his hand into Siva" (SivJkarana)? Why  should a bubhuksu and a mumuksu do things in reverse order? My Sanskrit  dictionaries were of little or no avail in tracking down the significance of  these, and many other, mystifying terms. With timely help from more expe 

rienced scholars in South India, however, I learned that many of the terms  I could not comprehend in the kriydpada were discussed in the jMnapada,  and so I began reading philosophical digests and commentaries in addition  to my ritual texts. Soon I was able to ferret out the meanings of most of the  bothersome terms and to gain a preliminary idea of what was going on in the  ritual.  

Yet clearing up perplexing terminology was only a first step. It slowly  dawned on me that the shared terminology of the two sections was not fortu itous. As the Saivas would put it, the fetter that was causing my ignorance  gradually "ripened," and its grip upon me loosened, enabling me finally to  see the principle of "conformity" (anuga) or connectedness of jfiana and  kriya to which Ramakantha so clearly refers. The two sections were meant to  be mutually explanatory; with good reason were they called two feet of the  same entity. Belatedly I started to follow a more conscious two-footed ap proach in my own reading and research, stepping back and forth between  ritual texts and philosophical texts, and found that each helped clarify and  explicate the other. The rituals served to illuminate and objectify Saiva  philosophical categories and topics, while philosophy helped me to under stand the purposes and strategies of Saiva ritual.  

More than that, I began to see that the Saiva texts envision a world—the  world, they would say—in which the capacities of humans to know about  that world and to act within it are two interrelated modalities of a unitary  power of consciousness. According to Saiva siddhanta, every animate  being, beginning with Siva, has a soul, whose principal characteristic is  "consciousness" (cit). Consciousness, in turn, manifests itself through two  primary powers: the power to know (Jnanasakti) and the power to act  (kriyasakti). Yet these two powers are not fundamentally distinct. Siva's  power, AghoraSiva tells us, is in essence a single power. However, because  of an "apparent" distinction (upddhi) between the spheres of knowing and  practical activity, this power seems to take on forms suitable to its tasks in  each domain (TPV 3). Similarly, what we humans experience as two sepa rate capacities, to know and to act, is, in the highest sense, the integral 

xii · Preface    

power of consciousness as it directs itself toward the seemingly distinct do mains of the knowable and the doable. From the highest point of view, the  powers of consciousness are one and the domains in which the powers act  are one; from our more limited human perspective, the unitary power ap pears divided and the single field for its exercise seems differentiated. The  conformity we observe now between the philosophical and ritual portions of  

the Saiva texts results, in the Saiva view, from this fundamental integrity.  The metaphysical unity of knowledge and action in Saiva siddhanta pro vides the underlying theme and the end point of this study. I will follow  an oscillating course throughout, back and forth between accounts of the  philosophically constructed world of Saiva jfiana and explication of Saiva  kriyd within that world, in an attempt to demonstrate and illustrate the inte gral relationship between these two modes of Saiva religious consciousness.  At the outset I can only point to the complex intertwining of knowing and  acting in Saiva siddhanta; in the course of the discussion to follow, it will  take on a more definite shape and texture. In the end I hope to indicate that  the "distinction" between philosophical knowledge and ritual action, while  useful and necessary as a starting point for the study of Saiva worship, be comes increasingly indistinct as we delve into it, much as the Saiva philoso phers themselves speak of the division between knowing and acting as only  an "apparent" dichotomy of a fundamentally unified human capacity of  consciousness. 

Acknowledgments    

AT THE COMMENCEMENT of daily worship, a Saiva ritualist constructs a  new "body of mantras" by superimposing onto himself a host of powers  greater than his own. He is then able to make use of that augmented body in  performing all subsequent acts of devotion. Writing this book has not ex actly been an act of puja, but I too have benefited from and relied on the  support and assistance of many powers beyond my own in the course of this  study. I would like to invoke each here with the appropriate namaskara.  

My initial research in India, the bija of all that follows, was facilitated  through the Kuppuswami Sastri Research Institute in Madras, the Sarasvati  Mahal Library in Thanjavur, and the Institut Frangais d'Indologie in Pon dicl^ry. I was very fortunate to read Saiva ritual texts with Dr. S. S. Janaki,  Director of the Kuppuswami Sastri Research Institute, and philosophical  texts with T. R. Damodaran, formerly with the Sarasvati Mahal Library.  Both helped me in myriad ways during my stay in India, and I thank them  for their friendship. I wish also to thank Sn K. A. Sabharatna Sivacarya of  Madras, whose command of agama-based Saiva ritual, both practical and  textual, is of a kind rarely encountered among Saiva priests nowadays. His  demonstrations and explications helped immensely in making the mil lenium-old agama texts come alive for me. He was also kind enough to let  me photograph his enactment of rites of daily worship.  

Three scholars associated with the Institut Frangais d'Indologie deserve  special mention: N. R. Bhatt, Ηέΐέηε Brunner, and Bruno Dagens. Pandit  Bhatt generously went over my early translations of the Kamikagama, pa tiently answering my endless questions, and Dr. Brunner sent me a valuable  set of comments and suggestions on a Kriyakranuidyotika translation. Pro fessor Dagens perceptively discussed the project in its early stages and later  on made detailed suggestions on a written draft. More than this personal  assistance, however, their careful and painstaking work in the field of  saivdgama studies over the past twenty-five years, collecting, editing, and  translating, provides the foundation on which any future research rests. It  would not be possible for me to cite all the places in this study where I have  relied on their insights and authority.  

At the University of Chicago, where the project germinated as a disserta tion, I benefited greatly from day-to-day contact with a whole community of  South Asian scholars. In particular, I would like to thank the members of  my committee, A. K. Ramanujan and Bernard Cohn, for their support  

throughout. Ronald Inden, my adviser, has been especially important at  every stage of this manuscript. He initially pointed me toward the study of 

xiv * Acknowledgments    

$aiva siddhanta texts, and through numerous conversations he suggested  new paths to explore in the material when I saw none. It is his combination  of critical rigor and breadth of interest that I have sought, albeit imperfecdy,  to emulate in my study.  

The Department of Religious Studies at Yale University, where the proj ect made that difficult metamorphosis from dissertation to book, has pro vided a supportive and stimulating environment for research.  

Truly the mulamantra at the root of any research project in these times is  funding. Support for research in India was provided by the U.S. Department  of Education through a Fulbright-Hays fellowship. The USEF-I officers ad ministering the grant in Delhi and Madras were always helpful to me. For  writing up the dissertation, I enjoyed the support of the Mrs. Giles Whiting  Foundation and the Committee on Southern Asian Studies, University of  Chicago. Final preparations have been assisted through the grace of an  A. Whitney Griswold Faculty Research Grant, the Frederick W. Hilles  Fund, and the Morse Fellowship in the Humanities at Yale University.  

Hank Heifetz transmitted some esoteric WordPerfect mantras to me at a  crucial moment. Charles Bryan, a graphics student at the Yale School of  Art, transformed several of my initial drawings into finished form. Several  other persons read earlier versions of this study and helped remove many of  its lingering fetters: Charles Collins, Ginni Ishimatsu, Ralph Strohl, Cyn thia Talbot, and two anonymous readers at Princeton University Press. Finally, I want to thank Rita McCleary, whose careful editing and countless  suggestions are responsible for much of whatever clarity exists in this work.  Om ham sarvebhyo namah. 

## Abbreviations    

A Ajit gama  

Ac Acinty gama  

PV Ālayapravesavidhi of Samakantha  

BhK Bhogak rik of Sadyojyoti  

IP Īi nasivagurudevapaddhati of Īsānasiva  JNP J tinirnayap rvakalayapravesavidhi of R makantha  K K mik gama, p rvabhaga  

K l K lottar gama (S rdhatrisati K l )  

K l V vrtti of R makantha on K lottaragama  K r K rart gama, purvabhaga  

Kir Kiran gama  

KKD Kriy kramadyotik of Aghorasiva  

KKDP prabh of Nirmalamani on Kriyakramadyotika  LPur Lingapur na  

ML Mudr laksana  

MM Mayamata  

MP Matangap ramesvar gama  

MP V vrtti of R makantha on Matangaparamesvaragama  Mr Mrgendr gama  

MrĀV vrtti of N r yanakantha on Mrgendragama  Mr VD d pik of Aghorasiva on Mrgendr gamavrtti  MV Mahotsavavidhi, a portion of Aghorasiva's KKD  PA Pauskaragama  

R Raurav gama  

SAC Sivarcan candrik of Appayad ksita  

S SS Sakalagamas rasamgraha  

SDS Sarvadarsanasamgraha of Madhava  

SP Somasambhupaddhati of Somasambhu  SPbh Saivaparibh s of Sivagrayogin  

SPM Saiv gamaparibhāsāmanjari of Vedajnana  SPur Sivapurana, Vayaviyasamhita  

Sataratnasamgraha of Umapati  

SS Siddhantasaravali of Trilocanasiva  

SSPbh $aivasiddhantaparibha$a of Suryabhatta  SSV vyakhya of Anantagambhu on Siddhantasaravali  SupA Suprabhedagama  

SvaA Svayambhuvagama  

SvaT Svacchandatantra 

xvi • Abbreviations    

TP Tattvaprakāsa of Bhojadeva  

TPD dipik of Sr kum ra on Tattvaprakāsa  TPV vrtti of Aghorasiva on Tattvaprakāsa  TS Tattvasamgraha of Sadyojyoti  TST t k of Aghorasiva on Tattvasamgraha  TTN Tattvatrayanirnaya of Sadyojyoti  TTNV vrtti of Aghorasiva on Tattvatrayanirnaya  UKA K mik gama, uttarabh ga  

V V r gama  

VS V tulasuddh gama 

  

Ritual in an Oscillating Universe 

  



## INTRODUCTION    

Locating the Tradition  

THIS IS a study of the inner world of the Hindu temple: the world, that is,  constructed and acted upon by the priests who perform the liturgical rounds  that animate and maintain a temple as a living place of worship. To compre hend this world, we will reenact the central ritual of temple Hinduism, seek ing as we do to reconstruct as well the metaphysical setting within which  this ritual makes sense and from which it derives its efficacy for those who  perform it.  

"Daily worship" (p&jd, nityapuja) is the ubiquitous Hindu ritual form by  which devotees of a divinity regularly offer tokens of their respect and ado ration to that deity embodied in an image or icon. It is the most common and  recurrent ritual action of Hindu temples, and in many respects it is paradig matic for the entire system of temple ritual as it developed in medieval  India. As a general ritual pattern, pUja has myriad variations. Each Hindu  order articulates its own version of piija, suitable for the particular god or  goddess to whom it is directed and adapted to its own particular theological  convictions.1  

Here I will focus on the complex formulation of daily worship articulated  by the Saiva siddhanta school during the early medieval period, and re corded in a corpus of Saiva agama and paddhati texts compiled in roughly  the eighth through twelfth centuries.2 The Saiva siddhanta texts offer with out a doubt one of the most complete, detailed, and interesting descriptions  of medieval Hindu liturgical practice, and one that is to some extent still  authoritative today in South Indian temples.  

More specifically, I will draw principally on two fundamental texts of this  tradition: the Kamikagama, which provides a full discussion of public tem ple worship, and AghoraSiva's Knyakramadyotika, a twelfth-century pad dhati that gives the most influential Saiva siddhanta account of private wor ship.3 Concentrating on the ritual prescriptions (yidhi) for daily worship  contained in these two texts will enable us to comprehend much of the met aphysical world of Saiva siddhanta, for Saiva puja acts as a virtual precis of  Saiva siddhanta theology, a daily catechism in action for worshipers who  undertake it with diligence and mindfulness.  

Before we enter the inner world of the medieval Saiva masters and begin  this imaginative reenactment of nityapuja, however, it will be useful to lo cate the Saiva siddhanta order outwardly, as a historical religious commu nity that defined itself and formulated its theological and ritual system in a  

larger cosmopolitical setting. Saiva siddhanta is nowadays a significant4 • Introduction    

school of Hindu philosophy and religious practice prevalent only in the  South Indian state of Tamilnad. However, in the early medieval period with  which we will be primarily concerned, Saiva siddhanta was a school of Pan Indian scope enjoying close ties with the political order and often exercising  decisive control over the principal religious and social institutions of the  time. Let us begin not with the Saiva priests and adepts themselves, but with  one of the great patrons of medieval Saivism, the Cola king Rajaraja I.  

RAJARAJA'S GREAT TEMPLE  

In 985 C.E., when RajarSja I became king, the Cola kingdom was a modest  one. Under Rajaraja's great-grandfather ParaAtaka I, it had expanded rapidly  to include much of South India. But in 953 the Rastrakuta king Krsna ΙΠ  marched from the north against the upstart Colas and defeated them deci 

sively at the battle of Takkolam. Thirty-two years of retreat, dynastic confu sion, and gradual rebuilding followed for the Cola royalty. By the time of  Rajaraja's consecration, the Colas had reconsolidated their sovereignty in  the Kaveri River basin of Tamilnad and had acquired some territories be yond their traditional regional center.4  

Once he became king, Rajaraja began a series of military campaigns. As  he explained in his inscriptions, he became convinced, "in his life of blos soming strength," that "the great goddess Earth, as well as the goddess of  Fortune, had become his wife." Because of this conviction, he "graciously"  conquered kings in every direction, extending his sovereignty until he was  "so resplendent that he was worshiped everywhere."5 These campaigns  went on for nearly twenty years, until almost all of India south of the Tun 

gabhadra, as well as parts of Sri Lanka and the Maldive Islands, owed hom age to the Cola king. In his own terms, he accomplished a "conquest of the  quarters" (digvijaya) and made all kings into his tributaries; he then returned  to dwell in his own city, Thanjavur.  

In 1003, the nineteenth year of his reign and near the completion of these  military campaigns, Rajaraja began construction of an imperial temple in  the capital. By the time of its consecration six or so years later, the  RajarajeSvara stood as the most massive temple in India: a granite tower of  fourteen stories 190 feet high, with a base 96 feet square, set in a rectangu 

lar courtyard 500 feet by 250 feet. The primary icon of the temple was a  colossal Siva-linga, probably the largest such linga in existence. The octago nal dome at the top of the tower, directly above the central linga, was com posed of a single huge stone, weighing about eighty tons, that according to  tradition was conveyed to the top by means of a ramp four miles long. The  temple was sometimes called the "Dak§inameru," or World-Mountain of the  South, and indeed it must have towered above the Cola landscape like a  world-mountain.6  

The purpose of this monumental structure was to provide a home for the 

Locating the Tradition - S    

divinity that Rajaraja and his retinue considered the preeminent overlord of  the cosmos, so that the god would come to receive the homage and offerings  of devotion presented by the king, his family, and his kingdom. The god  was Siva, referred to in the inscriptions variously as RajarajeSvara ("Lord of  Rajaraja"), AiJavallan ("Master of Dance"), and Dak^inameravitaAkar ("Lord  of the Southern World-Mountain"). Siva typically dwells upon Mount Kai lasa, the Uttarameru or Northern World-Mountain. It is a measure of the  ambition embodied in this imperial act that Rajaraja could portray himself  as having offered Siva a new home in the south, equal to Siva's Himalayan  abode.  

To serve Siva and the other divine inhabitants of the temple, Rajaraja and  his royal entourage made extensive donations and endowments, many of  which are recorded on the stone walls of the temple.7 Rajaraja himself pre sented gold articles weighing almost five hundred pounds troy weight, silver  

objects of more than six hundred pounds troy, and myriad jewels. The  king's elder sister Kundavai, the second most generous donor, gave about  a hundred pounds of gold and almost two hundred pounds of silver and jew els. Rajaraja also gave land, making over the royal share of produce from  numerous villages throughout his dominion and as far afield as Sri Lanka.  These endowments yielded an annual income of roughly a quarter million  bushels of rice paddy. To supply ghee for cooking and for burning oil  lamps, livestock was donated to the temple. One inscription details 2,832  cows, 1,644 ewes, and 30 she-buffalos that were assigned to 366 cowherds,  who were in turn required to supply ghee to the temple at the rate of one  ulakku (roughly half a pint) per day for every 48 cows or 96 ewes. (An  ulakku of ghee per day will keep a "perpetual lamp" burning continuously.)  Arrangements were also made for the regular supply of such cooking ingre dients and condiments as fruit, pulse, pepper, tamarind, mustard, cumin,  sugar, curds, plantains, salt, greens, areca nut, and betel leaves. All of these  were necessary for the regular offerings of worship on a suitably grand  scale, and for the even grander special offerings made during the several  "great festivals" held annually.8  

A religious institution on such a scale of course required personnel as  well as endowments. As the temple inscriptions record it, the king arranged  for other temples throughout the realm to supply dancers, some four hun dred in all, to entertain Siva. Forty-eight musicians along with two drum mers were assigned to the regular recitation of the Tevaram hymns com posed by the Tamil Saiva saints. The assemblies of brahman settlements  (brahmadeyas) were required to furnish young students to act as temple ser vants and accountants. Other villages were called upon to send people for  carrying out such diverse services at the temple as holding the parasol  (eleven persons), lighting lamps (eight persons), and sprinkling water on the  deities (four persons); also required were potters, washermen, barbers, as trologers, tailors, jewel-stitchers, braziers, carpenters, and goldsmiths. 

6 • Introduction    

Priests (acaryas) were brought in from all parts of the subcontinent to  execute the liturgical program. One inscription details the provisions made  for them: each year roughly forty-five hundred bushels of paddy were to be  supplied for the head priest Sarvasivapandita, his worthy students, and his stu dents' students, who were natives of AryadeSa (North India), MadhyadeSa  (the Deccan), and GaudadeSa (Bengal).  

While Rajaraja's imperial temple is one of the most impressive and best documented medieval religious structures of South Asia, it is by no means  unique. Throughout the subcontinent during the half millennium between  700 and 1200 C.E., and longer in the south, Hindu kings sought to outdo one  another in the scale and lavishness of the temples they constructed. Ca lukyas, Pallavas, Rastrakutas, Pratiharas, Colas, Kalacuiis, Candellas—a  number of Hindu dynasties centered in various parts of the subcontinent  staked claims to imperial status at some point during the early medieval  period, and each sought to solidify and display its position through the con struction of appropriately commanding stone monuments.  

Even Rajaraja's son and successor, Rajendra I (1012-1044), performed a  second digvijaya, extending still further the domain owing homage to the  Cola crown, and then returned to construct thirty-five miles from Thanjavur  a wholly new capital city, named Gangaikondacolapuram ("the city of the  Cola king who took the Ganges"). In the midst of the new capital Rajendra  built yet another imperial-scale Saiva temple, to rival in its authoritative  presence the edifice of his father.  

TEMPLE HINDUISM  

The ideological setting for Rajaraja's and Rajendra's building programs was  a particular historical formation I will here simply call "temple Hinduism,"  which became the dominant religious and political order of South Asia in  the seventh and eighth centuries, and which remained so for five hundred  years.9 Temple Hinduism consisted of a number of distinct schools of  thought that nevertheless largely shared both a body of ideas about how the  cosmos was organized and a set of practices that enabled followers to act  most efficaciously in that cosmos. These practices not only sought to bring  the agent personally into relation with God and to transform his or her con dition, but they also collectively engendered the relations of community,  authority, and hierarchy within human society. Though it drew upon earlier  Indian formations such as the Vedic sacrificial system, temple Hinduism  clearly distinguished itself from Vedism in several fundamental respects.  

Temple Hinduism directs itself primarily toward two gods, Visnu and Siva.  Each is viewed by his votaries as the highest overlord of the cosmos, the  transcendent and encompassing divinity. The supreme character of the di vinity is repeatedly expressed in appellations such as Purusa ("cosmic Per son"), paramesvara ("the highest Lord"), and visvesvara ("Lord of every-

Locating the Tradition · 7    

thing")· Yet, transcendent as they are believed to be, these gods are also  fully immanent, pervasive throughout the cosmos, and capable of manifest ing themselves visibly in the world through incarnation (avatara), emana tion (vyiiha), or embodiment (murti) in order to enter into direct relations  with other divinities and lesser beings such as humans. Schools might differ  from one another as to which divinity is supreme, but they share the theo logical premise that, to be supreme, God must be both transcendent and  immanent.  

The other divinities who inhabit the universe recognize the superiority of  Vi§nu and Siva. Narratives in the purdnas, cosmogonic texts of temple Hindu ism, often recount the events by which lesser gods such as Indra and Agni,  who were paramount in the Vedas, have been brought to this recognition.  Likewise, Saiva purdnas also feature accounts where Siva's main contem porary competitors for supremacy, Visnu and Brahman, assent to Siva's pre 

eminence. Accordingly, subordinate deities appear most often as acolytes  and devotees, and occasionally as aspects, of the highest god.  Relations between the high gods and humans are, likewise and even more  so, asymmetrical and hierarchical, not reciprocal as in the Vedas. The  proper attitude for a person to take toward Vi§nu or Siva is that of bhakti:  recognition of the god's superiority, devoted attentiveness, and desire to  participate in his exalted domain. The god is in no way compelled by human  devotion, nor by any ritual action humans may undertake (as the Vedic exe getes claimed of sacrificial ritual), but he may freely choose to grant favor  (prasada) or grace (anugraha) to those humans who have properly recog nized and served him.  

Such acts of divine generosity of course have profound transformative  consequences for their recipients. They bring one worldly benefits (bhoga),  but much more important within this system of values, they lead one toward  liberation (moksa), the highest state to which a human may aspire. (The  Vedas, by contrast, may enable one to obtain worldly ends but do not envis 

age the superior goal of moksa, charge the advocates of temple Hinduism.)  Liberation is conceptualized in various ways by the different schools of  Hindu thought. Moksa always involves leaving behind the sufferings and  fetters that constitute our normal worldly existence, but it may lead one,  according to which school one follows, to a merging with the godhead, to  permanent service at the feet of the Lord, to autonomous and parallel divin ity, or to some other final and ultimate state. The character of liberation was  one of the major points of contention among the theological schools that  developed during this period.  

The internal attitude of bhakti is most visibly externalized in temple Hin duism through ritual action, of which pujd is the model. In this sense, piijd  replaces the Vedic sacrifice (yajna) as the paradigmatic ritual act of Indian  religiosity during this period. In puja, a worshiper invokes or invites the  deity into some material form, most often an image or icon visually and 

8 • Introduction    

symbolically representing the deity, and presents to him both material offer ings such as food and clothing and devoted services such as the recitation of  his praises, music, dance, and songs. Texts classify all these material and  performatoiy presentations to the deity as "services" (upacara). Vi§nu and  Siva, as gods simultaneously transcendent and immanent, enter into a vari ety of both anthropomorphic and aniconic objects so that their devotees may  see them and make their offerings of homage.  

In many respects, Hindu puja carries on the central ritual concerns of  Vedic yajna. Both center on acts whereby humans offer food to the gods.  Both require that the human participants attain a personal state of purity or  godliness consonant with the solemnity of the ritual action, and both pro vide means through which divinities are summoned to be present at the rit 

ual terrain. Once invoked, the divinities are treated with all the respect due  them and presented with a repast of the finest order. In most cases the re mainders of the meal are subsequently distributed among the community of  human worshipers in a prescribed hierarchical order. Both, accordingly, in volve an enactment of proper relations between humans and deities, as these  are understood by each, and may articulate as well status relationships  within the human community.  

However, several fundamental features clearly distinguish puja from the  Vedic form of worship. Vedic deities when invoked remain invisible. In  puja deities are summoned to inhabit material embodiments and so make  their presence evident even to humans of limited vision. Sacrificial offerings  cannot be presented directly to the divinities; another deity, the fire god  Agni, is required to act as intermediary, conveying the offerings to the other  gods. Offerings of puja, by contrast, may be made directly to the highest  god in the central image and to other subsidiary deities also present in their  own individual embodiments. And as temple Hinduism seeks to render rela 

tions between humans and divinities more visible and direct, it also attempts  to instantiate them more permanently. While Vedic public sacrifices are per formed in temporary ritual settings constructed for the occasion, public puja  (pararthapuja) takes place in a durable structure, built to last out of stone or  brick and elegantly decorated by sculptors and painters. Such a temple  serves as an enduring home for the divine image and for the god himself  who dwells within it.  

During the early medieval period, the temple became the dominant reli gious institution of South Asia. Myriad temples of every scale were con structed and dedicated not only to the two primary divinities but also to the  many lesser divinities who (at least in the view of Vaisnavas and Saivas) occu pied lower rungs in the hierarchy of lordship. As the permanent residence of  the deity in a particular community, the temple became much more than  simply the site of puja offerings. It acted as host to a wide assortment of  both personal and communal activities, ritual and otherwise. It provided the  stage upon which performing and literary arts developed. As employer, 

Locating the Tradition * 9    

landholder, and moneylender, it was often the major economic institution of  the community. It occupied the social center of the community, and it was  a primary arena in which relationships of authority and rank were consti tuted, contested, and displayed.10  

To sponsor a temple was a central act of devotion. Because it made pos sible all subsequent offerings, it was considered a foundational and most  efficacious ritual action. As offering public sacrifices had been in an earlier  time, so during this period an essential act of rule was to sponsor and endow  temples within one's dominion. This was true not just for independent and  imperial kings, but also for subordinate regional chieftains and for local  headmen or assemblies who exercised authority within their smaller and en compassed domains. Of course, at different levels of organization the re sources available would also differ. Architectural texts gave directions for  the construction of temples ranging from modest single-story shrines to vast  towers of twelve or more stories, and liturgical texts like Kamikagama  prescribed nine different gradations of puja offerings, ranging from "low est of low" to "highest of high," that a temple should follow "according  to its capacity." The size and wealth of a temple, accordingly, often served  as the visible index not only of the degree of religious aspiration of its build ers, but also of the scale of polity responsible for its construction and  maintenance.  

Building a temple, then, became a highly visible political act as well as  one of devotion. For instance, only a "king of kings" whose kingdom in cluded within it smaller, subordinated kingdoms, such as Rajaraja's did,  was considered qualified to construct a "preeminent temple" (mukhyapra sada), which was said to include within itself the various types of smaller  temples.11 Rajaraja's imperial temple, in this light, was not simply a matter  of a warrior turning his attention from military to religious matters in his  dotage. He intended it rather as the completion of his "conquest of the quar ters," a highly visible proclamation and embodiment of his political  achievement, which at the same time located this earthly accomplishment in  relation to diva's sovereignty over the entire universe. King over other  kings, subject to no other human lord, Rajaraja yet proclaims his fealty to  Siva.  

THE AGAMAS  

A new genre of liturgical texts became prominent during the early medieval  period, explicitly non-Vedic in origin and directed primarily toward the  temple cults of Visnu and Siva. This genre comprises the Vaispava samhitas,  the Saiva agamas, and somewhat later, the Sakta tantras centered on the  Goddess. I will focus here on the Saiva agamas, but much of what I say  applies equally to the samhitas and tantras. Like so many others in the field  of Indian studies, this extensive body of literature was largely dismissed and 

10 * Introduction    

left unexplored by scholars until recently. Yet it is a rich and diverse corpus  of texts and offers one of the most important sources we have for under standing the formation and development of temple Hinduism.  

A Saiva agama consists, ideally, of four "feet," or portions: knowledge  (jMna), ritual action (kriya), proper conduct (carya), and discipline (yoga).  Together, these four parts constitute everything worth knowing from a spir itual point of view; the section on knowledge reveals how the cosmos is  organized, and the other three sections fully instruct one who adheres to that  view of the world in how to act in it. As the Vayusamhita, borrowing a trope  from the Mahabharata, puts it, "Whatever is said in the other treatises, one  finds that in the Saiva agamas; and that which one does not find in the Saiva  agamas, is not found anywhere else."12  

The primary focus of the texts, however, is clearly on religious practice.  The agamas spell out in detail the organization of the temple cult, from the  ritual procedures and architectural guidelines needed to construct and ani mate Saiva temples, through the regular program of daily worship and sub sidiary rites, to the much larger occasional festivals. Many of the texts elab orate a pattern as well for daily household ritual, which parallels the daily  temple cult. They set forth a sequence of transformative rituals—initiations  and consecrations—that progressively incorporate the subject into the Saiva  community, move him toward liberation, and empower him to act as a tem ple priest or adept. In this respect, the agamas provide liturgical compen diums for Saiva priests (dcdrya), for renunciatory adepts (sadhaka), and for  committed householders worshiping at home shrines. They are the primary  ritual texts of medieval Saivism.  

According to the lists contained in nearly every text, the canon of Saiva  agamas consists in 28 "root" treatises (mulagama) and some 197 "subsidi ary" treatises (upagama).13 Despite this profusion, the texts repeatedly tell  us that the system of knowledge (Sivajnana) they express is unitary. They  view themselves as a single textual coipus. As the Kamikagama has it, each  agama represents a part of the body that is the whole of the sivajndna: the  Kanukagama is its feet, the Yogajagama represents its ankles, and so on up  to the Kiranagama as its jewelry and Vatulagama as its garments (KA 1.93- 101).  

They are fundamentally united, they claim, because all agamas originate  from a single source, namely from the highest god, Siva. Initially, the texts  say, the knowledge embodied in the agamas exists not in any verbal formu lation, but as "undifferentiated sound" or "pure thought," which has not yet  assumed any apparent divisions, but which contains immanently all there is  to know. During the process of emission (srsti), by which all things become  differentiated, Siva divides this unitary and subtle knowledge into a number  of versions, and in so doing transforms it into an auditory form (sabdarupa)  accessible to lower categories of beings. He emits it, according to some 

LocatingtheTradition - 11    

texts, in a series of "streams" (srotas) that issue from the five faces of  Sadaiiva.14 These differentiated verbal versions of the originally unitary  jnana are then passed on to a number of divine auditors, who in turn pass  them on to others.  

Eventually the dgamas reach the ears of humans, a momentous event.  The first human auditors of the dgamas are always rj/s, sages portrayed as the  most highly accomplished of all humans. The instruction may take place at  diva's dwelling on Mount Kailasa or in a forest hermitage such as the fa 

mous Narayanasrama. The sages approach the god and, desiring to hear the  superior knowledge of a Saivagama^ humbly request the god to teach them.  Here, for instance, is the setting in which SrikaQtha, a manifest form of Siva,  narrates the Kamikagama to an eminent coterie of pupils.  

On the southern peak of marvelous Kailasa, veiled by the shade of full-grown fig  trees, on a seat sparkling with jewels, clothed in the skin of a tiger, the great god  Siikantha, lord of all, was attended by gods, demons, heavenly musicians, divine  magicians, demigods, and still others.  

KauSika, KaSyapa, Agastya, Gautama, and Narada, Sanatkumara, Sanaka,  Sanatana, and Sanandana, Bhrgu, Atri, Bharadvaj a, Vasi stha, and others—all  these great sages desired to know the highest knowledge. They looked up at Siva  and Sakti, bowed at his feet, and addressed the Lord, Protector of Uma:  

"Blessed One, you are the Lord of the Gods of Gods. You untie the fetters  that bind the soul. You are the cause of emission, preservation, veiling,  reabsorption, and grace. You instantaneously set in motion the great mSya,  made up of Ether and the other elements. You are joined with the highest  Sakti, whose very form is complete intelligence. You are free from direc 

tion, space, and time. You bring joy to living beings. We have been ordered  by you, O Lord of Gods, to perform the worship of Siva. Out of compassion  for your devotees, please deign to tell us, O Lord of Gods, the system of  knowledge which came from Siva's mouth, and its meaning in essence."  

Asked in this way by the sages, the Lord whose flag bears the bull and whose  crown bears the gleaming half-moon answered in a deep voice.  "You have asked well. So listen, you who have fulfilled your vows, to the  highest system, which was extracted from the great text called 'Kamika.'  This system first appeared on Mount Meru, and has been passed on by  Pranava and others. It is the most complete system, containing ritual action  (kriya) and proper conduct (carya) as well as discipline (yoga) and knowl edge (jMna)."  

The sages, addressed thus, fell to the ground and bowed. Having given them  a command, Siva now taught this unsurpassed text. (KA 1.1-14)  

Siva goes on to set forth his teachings with the serene authority of om niscience.  

Siva addresses his instruction to an audience of the converted: those gods, 

12 * Introduction    

sages, and human followers who already recognize and accept his pre eminence. As these teachings are handed down in distinct agama texts, they  remain the exclusive possession of Saiva priests and initiates; others are, in  fact, excluded from hearing them.  

If uninitiated members of the three twice-born classes, persons born in the SMra  class, persons born of mixed parentage such as the savarna group, architects (ii7- pin), artisans, and the like should study the Saiva treatises, the king and kingdom  will be quickly destroyed on account of that sin. So the king should prevent  them. (KA 1.111-12)  

For such a select audience there is little need for polemic directed at other  religious groups or doctrines. There is, however, great need for practical  instruction. Most of the contents of the agamas concern ritual activity. Siva  sets forth, most often in the optative mood, those actions best calculated to  lead his auditors to the highest states of attainment. Subsequent members of  the Saiva community have carefully guarded and preserved these instruc tions, regularly copying over the manuscripts and passing them on to new  priestly generations over many centuries.  

Because the agamas consider themselves human recensions of what was  originally uttered by Siva, they do not lend themselves to precise dating. As  divine revelations of a universal knowledge, the agamas eschew all refer ences that might tie them down to particular times and places. Further, their  own theory of origination, involving a gradual emanation and successive  transmission, implies an openness to textual emendation and accretion. As  the SivajMna, while remaining fundamentally one, has been differentiated  and emitted over time, so human redactors of the agamas have on occasion  felt it necessary to add new formulations of Saiva thought and practice inso far as they cohere with the basic unity of the teachings. The result, from a  historicist point of view, is a corpus of texts that is maddeningly diverse in  compositional chronology.  

Undoubtedly many agamas were in existence by 700 C.E. The Pallava  king Narasimhavarman Π (695-728) refers to himself as "one who has re moved all his impurity (mala) by following the path of Saiva siddhanta" in  his foundation inscription on the Siva Kailasanatha temple of Kancipuram,  the largest imperial edifice built by the Pallavas. Among his royal titles in scribed there, he styles himself a "follower of the agamas" and "one whose  means of knowledge is the agamas."15 The South Indian sage Tlrumular  mentions nine agamas by name in his work of perhaps the seventh century,  Tirumantiram. But the agamas available to Narasimhavarman and Tiru mular are not necessarily the agamas that have been passed down to us.  

One of the texts Iirumular refers to is the Kamikagama, often described  as the "first" or "primary" agama. This text is also mentioned by name in  the Sutasamhita, which may also date from the seventh century. No doubt 

Locating the Tradition · 13    

a Kamikagama existed at an early time. Yet most portions of the Kami kagama that we have undoubtedly reflect the much larger scale of temple  construction and liturgy that developed in later centuries in South India. Its  architectural portions, for instance, follow those of the Mayamata, which  correspond to the Cola architecture of the eleventh century.16 Ritual pre 

scriptions are, in several cases, parallel to the prescriptions given in the di gests of SomaSambhu (of the late eleventh century) and AghoraSiva (twelfth  century). (I speak here primarily of the Purva Kamikagama; the second di vision, the Uttara Kamikagama, is perhaps later still.)17  

We must assume that a highly esteemed text like the Kamikagama would  be subject to a complex process of revision, both reflecting and guiding  developments and changes in the knowledge and practice of the Saiva com munity. I would propose, as a tentative approximation, that the most signif icant recasting of the Kamikagama took place in Tamilnad during the elev enth century, in light of Cola-period temple culture, and under the strong  influence of the Saiva siddhanta school. Some of its contents are no doubt  older than this, and some have been added since, but the weight of the text  is grounded, it seems to me, in that period.  

With some other agamas we can be on surer chronological ground, at  least as to their tennini ad quem. The oldest extant agama manuscript, of  the Kiranagama, was transcribed in 924 C.E.18 The Mrgendragama was com mented upon by the Kashmiri Saiva siddhanta author NarayaQakaQtha in the  late tenth or early eleventh century, and his commentary in turn was glossed  by AghoraSiva in the mid-twelfth century.19 In cases such as these, we can  be certain that the texts we have correspond to versions available in the tenth  century, and perhaps earlier. Beyond this, however, scholars of the Saiva  agamas have only begun to develop the means of distinguishing different  chronological strata within the texts. Until such an internal archeology is  more fully established, efforts to trace the development of pre-tenth-centuiy  Saivism within the agamas are premature.  

As we have seen, the agamas assert an overall coherence while recogniz ing at the same time the differentiation within the genre. "Like the sparkling  gem Cintamani," says Kamikagama, "the Saiva teachings appear as both  one and many. Although they are unitary because of their speaker [Siva],  they are also multiple because they are divided into streams [as the gem,  while a single object, glistens with many beams]" (KA 1.103). Indeed,  within the agamas is a diversity of teachings. They present neither a single  philosophically consistent doctrine, nor a unified liturgical system; rather,  they offer us a variegated, multiple body of Saiva thought. On many basic  matters, the agamas appear in complete agreement. Yet within the corpus  one finds fundamental points of disagreement as well. Some agamas argue  a monist metaphysics, while others are decidedly dualist. Some claim that  ritual is the most efficacious means of religious attainment, while others14 - Introduction    

assert that knowledge is more important. They advance different lists of the  basic constituents of material being, the tattvasP0 Such differences in the  texts of course reflect the various "streams" of thought within a large and  geographically extensive Saiva community as it developed in the early  medieval period.  

If the agama corpus, like CintamaQi, was both one and many, the  "schools" of Saivism that formed themselves in the early medieval period  took it as their task to formulate from this diverse canon a coherent doctrine,  one that could hold up in philosophical debate. Yet, as it turned out, more  than one unity subsisted within the agamas. Different Saiva schools articu 

lated quite different philosophical viewpoints, yet each based its doctrines  on the authority of the agamas. The dualist Saiva siddhanta, the strict mo nist Kashmiri schools of Trika and Pratyabhijfia, and the VIraSaivas of Kar nataka, to name the most noteworthy, all claimed allegiance to the Saiva  

agamas.21 Of these, we are concerned here only with the Saiva siddhanta.  

ŚAIVA SIDDHANTA  

The temple of Rajaraja reflects the teachings of one particular agama-based  school of Saivism, the Saiva siddhanta. Indeed, there are many reasons to  suppose that this was the most prominent Hindu order in early medieval  Tamilnad. Even today, Saiva siddhanta is an important school of Hindu phi 

losophy in Tamilnad, and temples in the region most often claim allegiance  to Saiva siddhanta liturgical texts.  

It is difficult to be precise about the origins of Saiva siddhanta as a dis tinct order. Sometime around the ninth century, it seems, Saiva siddhanta  appeared as part of a division within the larger Saiva community. The works  of the monist theologian Saiikara and his successors provide a useful index  for this shift. Writing probably at the very beginning of the ninth century,  Sankara speaks in his commentary on BrahmasUtra 2.2.37 of a single order  of Saiva dualists, which he calls "MaheSvaras." The MaheSvaras are else 

where called PaSupatas. The mid-ninth-century commentaries of Vacaspati  MiSra and Bhaskaracarya, by contrast, distinguish four categories of Saivas:  the Saiva, PaSupata, Karunika, and Kapalika orders. For these ninth-century  observers, Saivism was changing from a single and undifferentiated reli 

gious community to a group composed of several distinct orders or schools  of thought. From the ninth century, it became conventional to speak of four  Saiva schools, though the names varied: most commonly they are called  Saiva siddhanta, PaSupata1 Kalamukha, and Kapalika.22  

Within this new quaternity of Saivism, Saiva siddhanta attempted to por tray itself as the "pure" (Juddha) Saivism, the "fully completed" (siddhanta)  Saivism, or more simply as Saivism par excellence. If Saiva siddhanta is  "auspicious" (Saiva), Aey claimed, the other so-called Saiva orders are "in auspicious" (raudra). Not surprisingly, Saiva siddhanta claimed to offer a 

Locating the Tradition · 15    

more compelling and more efficacious formulation of the iivajnana, partic ularly as regards human liberation, than the competing schools of Saiv ism.23 Yet we know very little about the actual doctrinal or practical dis putes that brought about the division in Saivism, nor do we know the  

context in which the division initially took place.  

While the earliest moment of Saiva siddhanta self-definition necessarily  remains vague, the picture becomes clearer around 900 C.E. From this time  on there exist a large number of dated inscriptions referring to Saiva sid dhanta priests and ascetics, furnishing much fuller information about their  affiliations and spiritual lineages. Followers of Saiva siddhanta turn up in  Madhya Pradesh (especially the Dahala region), in Rajasthan, Gujarat, Ma 

harashtra, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Tamilnad, and even in Southeast Asia.  These epigraphical references coincide with the appearance of Saiva monas tic institutions (mathas), to which many of these Saivas were attached, and  with a heightened program of Saiva temple construction throughout the sub continent. The inscriptional and archeological evidence suggests that from  the tenth through twelfth centuries a broadly extended network of interre lated Saiva siddhanta lineages spread itself out over much of India, acting  frequently as spiritual preceptors to kings, constructing and presiding over  

temples and monasteries, and propagating the teachings of the agamas.74  Aghorasiva, the twelfth-century South Indian author of many Saiva  siddhanta works, serves as an apt exemplar of this "stem with many widely  spreading branches."25 At the conclusion of his Kriyakramadyotika, he  specifies his lineage of twelve Saiva preceptors reaching back to the legen dary sage Durvasas (MV pp. 424-27). Among his predecessors, he lists  Uttungasiva, a Gujarati living at Kalyananagari (perhaps the capital of the  later Calukyas, in Karnataka), and Brahmasiva, also hailing from Gujarat;  PiIrnaSiva and Vidyantaiiva, who served as royal preceptors in Varanasi;  Sarvatmasiva, who was "received hospitably" by the ruler of Great Puri, in  the Northern Konkan near present-day Bombay; and Snkanthasiva, "a bull  among the Bengalis." AghoraSiva's own preceptor also came from Bengal,  apparently traveling south to Tamilnad. Several others in the succession  lived and taught in the Cola dominions of South India.  

During this period, the earliest independent Saiva siddhanta treatises of  explicitly human authorship were composed. From the tenth century on,  Saiva authors writing in Sanskrit produced an array of agama commentaries  (vrm's), ritual manuals (paddhatis), and philosophical treatises. Here I will  refer to this entire body of texts as the "paddhati literature." Paddhatis tread  in the "footprints" of other texts, and this corpus of Saiva writings, both  ritual and philosophical, follows in the path set forth by the Saiva agamas.  And since these texts, unlike the agamas, do not profess to be the direct  words of Siva, the paddhati authors are not reticent about leaving clues that  allow us to locate them historically. Thus, Aghorasiva tells us in a colophon  to his Kriyakramadyotika that he completed this work in 1157 C.E. (MV 

16 * Introduction    

p. 433), and in his commentary to the Tattvatraytmirpaya he extols himself  as the guru ornamenting the Cola country (77TW 32).  

The primary task of the paddhatis, as their authors saw it, was to clarify  the views of the Saiva siddhanta school and to refute the wrong views of  others, all in order to enhance the spiritual welfare of their audience. In light  of the diverse teachings of the agamas, it was important first of all to make  the Saiva teachings easily comprehensible. One of the earliest paddhati au thors, Sadyojyoti says in the opening verse of Tattvasarpgraha, "I will ex plain the tattvas concisely, so that even those of simple minds may under 

stand" (TS 1). The agamas themselves are sometimes too prolix to allow  easy comprehension, but the paddhati authors claim to put matters simply,  concisely, and clearly by virtue of their own comprehensive study and their  lucidity. ISanaSiva tells us that he wrote his paddhati only after extensive  examination of the agama texts (IP 1.1), while the eleventh-century Para mara king and author Bhojadeva praises his own clarity of mind: "The king  Bhojadeva composed this matchless Tattvaprakaia, containing the meaning  of the saivagamas. In that lord's consciousness, the entire set of tattvas  gleam as clearly as myrobalan fruits held in the palm of the hand" (TP 76).  This effort at systematization of agama teachings no doubt often had effects  on the agamas themselves, as texts like Kamikagama were revised to accord  more closely with developing Saiva siddhanta doctrine and practice.  

The paddhati authors were inspired to set forth their system clearly and  forcefully by other competing systems of thought. When Vidyakantha in structs his pupil Narayanakantha to compose a commentary on the Mfgetidra gama, he explains the need for such a work: "Treatises are written time and  again by adherents of other schools, while up to now the seal on this school  has not been broken" (MrAV vidya 1.1). AghoraSiva gives a similar reason  for commenting on Bhojadeva's Tattvaprakaia: "I undertake this commen 

tary because the text has elsewhere been commented upon by others who are  filled with the tainted ideas of nondualism (advaita) and who lack the true  knowledge of siddhanta" (TPV 1). These other systems, they claim, have  led people astray. Confused by the welter of competing viewpoints, some  people abandon the superior Saiva view and follow other, inferior ones.  

Some have been won over by the Vedas, others by the views of Kaula, and still  others by the Nyaya school. The willful elephant (matanga) has abandoned the  path set out by Saiva siddhanta and celebrated by the best gurus, and has been led  on a bad route. Therefore, put to the test by these other scholars, we have sought  to refute the wrong views by striking them with the goad of this commentary, and  to return the elephant onto the correct path. (MPAV vidya 1.1)  

Consequently there is a greater polemical dimension to the paddhati liter ature than to the agamas upon which it was based. Sadyojyoti, for instance,  directs his NareSvarapariksa chiefly against the Buddhists for their denial of 

LocatingtheTradition · 17    

the soul and against the MTmamsakas, primary medieval proponents of the  Vedic tradition, for their denial of the category of the Lord. Here, as in  many paddhati texts, there is also a strong argument against nondualist po sitions such as those held by Kashmiri Saivas and Advaita Vedantins. A  later text, Sivagrayogin's Satvaparibhafa takes it upon itself to summarize  and refute the positions on mok$a held by Carvaka, Madhyamika, Yogacara1  Samkhya, Nyaya, Mlmamsa, Jainas, thepurdnas, and several competing Saiva  schools including the Mahavratins, PaSupatas1 and Kapalikas (SPbh pp.  335-52). Paddhati authors wrote consciously in a world of competing view 

points, attempting to distinguish the Saiva siddhanta route prominently from  the many paths prescribed by others.  

Their intellectual efforts, then, were directed at reestablishing a lost unity  among the dgama texts and at guiding back to the right path a community  of Saivas who had wandered off. Yet through their efforts the paddhati au thors created something as much new as old. They identified a central tradi tion within the more disparate corpus of the dgamas, articulated this tradi tion into a unified system of thought and action, and established it as the  basis for a new community of priests, monks, and lay followers. So success ful were the paddhati authors in this endeavor that they ended up nearly  eclipsing the dgamas themselves as guides to Saiva knowledge and prac tice.26 It is to paddhatis such as Aghorasiva's Kriydkramadyotika, rather  than to the dgamas upon which they are based, that later Saiva practitioners  have most often turned for ritual guidance.  

AghoraSiva stands at the culmination of this intellectual project, spanning  two and a half centuries and encompassing many parts of India, that aimed  at formulating from the Saiva dgamas a coherent and systematic school of  thought and practice.27 Writing in South India in the mid-twelfth century,  Aghorasiva was one of the most prolific of all Saiva siddhanta authors, com 

posing commentaries on dgamas, an extensive ritual digest, several philo sophical commentaries, and even a few works of belles lettres, unfortu nately no longer available. He relied not only on the dgamas themselves but  on the works of many other paddhati authors as well. He cited UttungaSiva,  Bhojadeva, and SomaSambhu as among his teachers and influences; he  wrote commentaries on the works of Sadyojyoti, Bhojadeva, RamakaQtha,  and Narayanakantha; and in his writings he quoted from the works of many  other Saiva authors also. It is no exaggeration to say that his works offer the  fullest, most cohesive articulation of the agama-based Saiva siddhanta sys tem integrating philosophy and ritual.28  

Within a century of AghoraSiva's lifetime, two major events transformed  the Saiva siddhanta order. With the establishment of the Delhi sultanate in  1206 under Qutb al-dTn Aybak, the balance of North Indian military power  decisively shifted away from the independent Hindu dynasties that had sup 

ported temple Hindu orders like Saiva siddhanta, and came to rest with 

18 • Introduction    

iconoclastic Turko-Afghan Muslims. In this altered climate, Saiva sid dhanta seems to have quickly disappeared as an identifiable school in north ern India. Compared with other, more ascetically oriented Saiva orders such  as the Kapalikas and Kalamukhas, Saiva siddhanta was primarily an institu tional school centered on temples and monastic networks, and consequently  dependent on continuing royal patronage. As a result, it was particularly  vulnerable to this transformation of the North Indian political order. When  Saivism did resurface as a public religion there several centuries later, re generating itself under more tolerant Tslamic regimes or within renegade  Hindu clans, it was quite different in character from the medieval Saiva  siddhanta order. Meanwhile, the more aniconic school of VTrasaivas be came the dominant form of Saivism in the Deccan. So from the thirteenth  century on, Saiva siddhanta has been largely a regional Hindu order of  South India, and especially of Tamilnad, where it was largely unaffected by  early Islamic attacks.  

The second event was literary, not political. Around 1221, MeykaQtar com posed the Civaruinapdtam, the first and most important exposition of Saiva  siddhanta theology in Tamil.29 This was soon followed by the extensive  Tamil works of Arulnanti, Manavacakam Katantar, and Umapati, elaborating  and extending Meykantar's core teachings. Even though these authors very  largely and explicitly based their writings on the Sanskrit agamas and the  paddhatis, and even though Umapati (as well as others) continued to com 

pose works in Sanskrit as well as Tamil, the dominant language for Saiva  siddhanta theology (though not for ritual) shifted from Sanskrit to Tamil.  With this shift in linguistic preference also some changes in doctrinal em phasis. Most notable among these, from the perspective of this study, Tamil  Saiva siddhanta authors decreased the role of ritual in religious attainment,  considering knowledge and devotion as sufficient for liberation.30 At the  same time, they sought to relate the teachings of Saiva siddhanta to the  earlier Tamil poetry of the nayanmar poet-saints, a regional tradition of  considerable popular bearing.31 In some matters, such as epistemology and  refutation of other schools, the Tamil authors clearly surpassed previous  exponents of Saiva siddhanta. However, the shift has also tended to cut off  the ritual prescriptions of the agamas and paddhatis (which are still to some  extent authoritative in South Indian temples) from the theological moorings  that the early medieval authors gave them.32 In spite of this change, though,  the Tamil version of Saiva siddhanta is best seen as a philosophical continu ation and extension of the earlier Sanskrit-based school.  

These two events have also had a powerful bearing on the way scholars  have characterized Saiva siddhanta as a school of Hinduism. The impor tance of the Saiva siddhanta order in Tamilnad and its relative or complete  absence from other parts of South Asia have led most Indianists to view  Saiva siddhSnta as solely a Tamil school, based on the Tamil-language texts 

Locating the Tradition · 19    

of Meykanfar and the other three "lineage founders." This tendency goes back  at least as far as one of the pioneers of Tamil studies, G. U. Pope, who  wrote:  

The Saiva siddhanta is the most elaborate, influential and undoubtedly the most  valuable of all the religions of India. It is peculiarly the Southern Indian and  Tamil religion and must be studied by everyone who hopes to understand and  influence the great South Indian peoples.33  

Yet considerable inscriptional and textual evidence points to the Pan-Indian  character of Saiva siddhanta from the tenth to the thirteenth centuries, as I  have indicated. The task of drawing these materials together into a con nected historical account of Saiva siddhanta as a coherent, widespread me dieval Hindu order, however, remains to be accomplished.  

ŚAIVA SIDDHANTA AS A SYSTEM  

In this study, I take the notion of a Saiva siddhanta "system" seriously. The  texts themselves clearly envision the agamas and paddhati literature as  comprising a unity of thought and action, and accordingly I have chosen to  portray Saiva siddhanta as a coherent system of knowledge and practice.34  

The work of developing and articulating Saiva siddhanta as a ritual and  theological system was, as I have indicated, a collective and historical en deavor, beginning in an early stage that is now largely unrecoverable (and  will remain so until it is possible to establish a chronological segmenta tion of the agama texts), evolving within the context of temple Hinduism  as it became the dominant South Asian cosmopolitical formation, and re ceiving systematic treatment from Saiva siddhanta authors who sought to  derive from diverse agama sources a coherent Saiva dualism in knowledge  and practice. This system was the special preserve of initiated Saivites,  for whom it represented a detailed depiction of the cosmos and a program  for action within it. It was expressed more openly in the very public do main of the temple, for the participation of the larger community of Siva  worshipers.  

In this reenactment of daily worship and explication of the Saiva theolog ical world, I will present the Saiva siddhanta order, synchronically, at what  appears to be the high point of Saiva ritualism. The Kamikagama and  Kriyakramadyotika depict Saiva siddhanta ritual as it was formulated (and,  we can only presume, practiced by the most conscientious) in Tamilnad dur ing the eleventh and twelfth centuries.35 These two texts draw upon the  work of several generations of Saiva siddhanta paddhati authors as well as  the unknown transmitters of the dgamas, and they clearly reflect the large scale Saiva temple cult of Cola-period Tamilnad.  

In addition to these two basic treatises, I have found it necessary to use 

20 • Introduction    

other Saiva texts as well to supplement and contextualize the instructions of  Kamikagama and Kriydkramadyotika. In doing so I have tried to follow  Kamikagama's own directive concerning the use of primary and secondary  texts in constructing a temple and performing worship in it.  

One should perform [the ritual construction and consecration of a temple], begin ning with plowing and ending with establishment, according to a root treatise  (miildgama) only; if performed according to a subsidiary treatise (upagama),  builder and sponsor will both be destroyed And temple rituals from plow ing through worship itself should all be carried out according to the prescriptions  of the text with which one began, not according to some other treatise. One may  conduct a ritual according to the prescriptions of another treatise, however, if it  is not discussed in the primary text. (KA 1.104—7)  

The ritual reenactment here too follows the prescriptions of my two "root  treatises" insofar as possible. But as predominantly ritual in subject matter,  these two leave many matters implicit, particularly the theological back ground of the ritual. Such knowledge would have been tacitly supplied, of  course, by the well-trained Saiva initiate as he enacted the ritual, but we do  not share this internalized knowledge.  

Throughout this study, I make greatest use of dgamas and paddhatis that  are most closely related in outlook to the two primary texts: philosophical  treatises that AghoraSiva commented upon, the Mrgendrdgama, Somasam bhupaddhati, commentaries by Kashmiri Saiva siddhanta authors, Nirma lamani's commentary on the Kriyakramadyotika, and so on. Certain texts in  other genres of Sanskrit literature, such as puratms and iilpasdstras, reflect  a Saiva siddhanta viewpoint, and I use several of these also.36 With few  exceptions, I refer only to texts that adhere to an identifiably Saiva sid dhanta perspective. (The most important exception to this is the monist Ap payadik§ita's Sivarcanacandrikd, which provides an unusally detailed guide  to certain aspects of Saiva piijd.) Not only does this method enable us to  avoid the "destruction" that Kdmikdgama predicts for those too promiscu ous in their use of heterogeneous texts, but it also results in a portrait of  early medieval Saiva ritual and philosophy that is clear and systematic, just  as the paddhati authors sought to make it.  

There is of course a choice involved here, which should be noted at the  outset. As a Saiva order of priests and ascetics that developed over several  centuries and in many regions of the subcontinent, Saiva siddhanta was not  a completely unified phenomenon. There were important doctrinal and pro 

cedural differences within the school.37 For clarity of exposition, I choose  to present one formulation of Saiva siddhanta, one "stream" of the differen tiated SivajMna. Based as it is on several of the most esteemed and influen tial texts of the school, this version of Saiva siddhanta was no doubt an  authoritative one, especially in Tamilnad, in early medieval Kashmir, and 

Locating the Tradition * 21    

probably in other regions as well. But I do not wish to suggest that all  dgamas and Saiva siddhanta texts completely cohere with it. When I speak  of what "Saivas say" or what "the dgamas tell us," it should be understood  in this more particularized sense, as representing the views of an important,  even central, group of early medieval Saiva siddhanta masters who sought  to articulate a compelling and coherent Saiva worldview and to advance it  as the highest form of knowledge, the parajMna. 
