+++
title = "05 ORGANIZATION AND CONTENTS OF THIS COLLECTION"

+++

The essays of this collection are purposely not arranged according to any of the three systematics that are effectively normative for the study of religious traditions, whether in Asia or not. These three—chronological, geo-political, and sectarian—have become effectively naturalized as the proper categories for the study of religions. However, change is not chronologically uniform and developmental, religions engaged with power structures that were different from those familiar to us today \(nation-states\), and participants in traditions sometimes actively sought out other traditions for purposes of adaptation, appropriation, or rebuttal. For these reasons, the reader will not find the essays arranged in a chronological sequence, such as classic, medieval, and modern. Chronological divisions are usually more representative of political and military events, and constitute a presumptive framework into which the history of religious cultures is forced. More important, when considering the processes of ritual change, there is no reason to assume that there is a single, progressive history that can be used to structure a developmental sequence. Too often chronological periodization of this kind implicitly carries with it the sense of progressive development, that is, that later is somehow better. Nor are the essays grouped by geo-political categories—India, Nepal, Tibet, China, Japan. Such categories themselves often reflect contemporary power structures—both political and academic—rather than the connections between religious practices that concern us here. Geographical groupings frequently serve to minimize continuity across geo-political boundaries, emphasizing instead new developments supposedly more authentically responsive to the host culture. Lastly, the commonly deployed divisions of sectarian affiliation,111 such as Hindu and Buddhist, no matter how carefully nuanced within such divisions \(whether Vedic, Brahmanic, Hindu, or Theravāda, Mahāyāna, Vajrayāna, for example\), facilitate the kind of divisive specialization common to contemporary academia.112 Use of sectarian affiliation has frequently resulted in a kind of hermetic treatment, one in which changes in a tradition are understood solely in terms of its own preceding history, ignoring outside influences as part of the context of change.113 Such specialization promotes hermetic understandings of traditions, for example, only looking to earlier Buddhist sources for later Buddhist developments or representing Hinduism by the Bhagavadgītā. In the study of ritual per se and practice more generally, the kind of clear divisions commonly institutionalized in academia all too often inhibit the recognition of patterns that transcend those divisions.

One of the ways in which this collection seeks to stimulate the study of ritual change across the *longue durée* is to creatively juxtapose essays and the ritual traditions that they focus on in such as fashion as to make it possible to consider continuities within and between them—continuities that would otherwise be obscured by the more familiar rubrics. Thus, rather than employing any of the three familiar rubrics, the essays are arranged here in a fashion reminiscent of the steppingstones in some gardens in Japan. Instead of a regular, smooth progress that would allow viewers of the garden to move through the garden without conscious attention to where they are stepping or where they are standing, the unevenly placed stepping stones of Japanese gardens demand that the visitor attend to each footstep, to look where they are going, to see where they are in the garden and thus to see the garden rather than simply walking through it. The intentionally unfamiliar juxtapositions of the following essays will, hopefully, promote inquiry that does not assume a unilinear progressive development, nor an essential coherence based on contemporary nation-states, nor reinforce the tendency toward self-referential conceptions of religious traditions.

The studies that follow were not crafted to accord with any preconceived categorization, but rather to elicit the best contemporary scholarship on a single ritual—the *homa*. Consequently, the essays cannot be neatly systematized, as each reflects the variety of theoretical concerns and methodological approaches of the author of each contribution. The groupings—Symbolic and Comparative Studies, Textual Studies, and Descriptive Studies—reflect key meta-methodological commonalities between the essays, rather than an imposed systematization.



## Symbolic and Comparative Studies

The first set of essays approach the study of the *homa* by means of the symbolism of the ritual. Methodologically, these essays also share a comparative approach to the study of ritual. A concern with symbolism and the use of comparison are also found in other essays within the collection, suggesting the enduring importance of these approaches, but here they form the primary impetus of the three studies.



### Grether

Holly Grether’s essay opens our collection with a broad perspective, ranging across the ritual traditions of the entire Indo-Iranian religious complex, while also drawing on Central and East Asia materials as well. Citing Michel Strickmann’s rhetorical question regarding the lack of inquiry regarding the *homa* in East Asia, Grether briefly surveys the range across which the *homa* is found. The direction that she wants to move the inquiry, however, is toward a more thorough investigation of the Zoroastrian connection with early medieval developments in India—as against a one-dimensional narrative that only runs from the Vedas to tantra.

Her study draws on material from the Zoroastrian ritual tradition, particularly the *yasna*, and thus provides an important new perspective on Hindu and Buddhist versions of the *homa*. In terms of the role of textual sources for the study of ritual dynamics, Grether’s essay points up the important potential of the Avesta as an additional resource for studies of ritual across the *longue durée*. Grether takes the symbolism of fire and water as a basis for examining these ritual practices in a comparative mode. In her analysis, fire and water form a semiotic pair, found so widely throughout these ritual traditions that the pairing of one with the other constitutes a “ritual rule.”114

Central to the general theme of ritual change across the *longue durée*, she concludes \(citing Michael Witzel’s essay “Meaningful Ritual”\) that “while the basic structures of the agnihotra are shared, tantric traditions add several ritual frames. Tantric ritual structure, thus, cannot be a mere survival of old Vedic forms, but rather represents a special development. … While tantric rites contain more ritual sequences, the basic structure remains the same.”115 This points to a consistent pattern of what might be called semantic change. Semantic change, such as the deities to whom offerings are made, is much easier to effect and takes place more quickly than does syntactic change, the organizational structure and underlying ritual metaphor that shapes a ritual performance. The rituals that Grether examines are symmetrical in their structure, another characteristic found throughout tantric ritual.

Grether also highlights the Avestan symbolism in which the fire itself is considered an instantiation of the deity evoked, in this case Ahura Mazda. This ritual identification of the fire and the deity is also found throughout the range of *homa* rituals, and when identification of the practitioner with the fire and deity is added, the distinctively tantric aspect of ritual practice is manifest.

Some of the themes found in Grether’s study introduce topics also addressed by other essays in this collection. Interiorization of ritual actions is one of the themes that runs throughout this collection. Interiorization refers to the process by which a ritual that is performed manually as a set of physical actions comes to be internalized as a mentally performed ritual. Similarly, the role of sexual symbolism is also introduced—in this essay in terms of fire as masculine and water as feminine. Grether also discusses the pivotal role of initiation in establishing equivalencies between the *homa* and other rituals.



### Skorupski

Tadeusz Skorupski’s contribution to this collection gives us the symbolic associations and religious valences of fire in India from the earliest recorded period through the development of the tantric traditions. These are the meanings that inform the ritual practices of the Vedic, Brahmanic, and tantric fire offerings. Skorupski’s review reveals the multivalency of fire, which can represent seemingly everything—from birth and death, to digestion and sex, to breath and speech, and that ultimately it is the gate to immortality. In this milieu it is hardly surprising that Buddhist practitioners should have developed a version of the *homa* for their own use, a theme also discussed by Halkias in this volume.

One of the themes that emerges through these details is the basis for the internalization of ritual, which is often taken to be the hallmark of the shift from Brahmanic to tantric ritual. The internalization examined by Skorupski does not take the form of a meditative visualization of the formerly external ritual process itself. In other words, these are not simply a visualized repetition of the external ritual actions. Instead, the ritual is homologized in various ways with psycho-physiological processes. This is also found in Sugiki’s essay, where he employs the term “psycho-somatic” to refer to the internalized version of the *homa* that employs the esoteric physiology of winds, channels, and drops. The process of internalization employs a variety of metaphoric associations—offerings are breath, for example—rather than literally mentally visualizing the physical ritual activities. The internalization of ritual appears as the product of several different strains of creative re-envisioning of the ritual process. The example of the Kauṣitakī Upaniṣad’s concern with the unending character of the breath as oblation suggests the hope that by knowing that the true nature of the breath is oblation one attains the ritual status necessary for rebirth in the realm of the gods.



### Tachikawa

Musashi Tachikawa expands the scope of our study to Japan. He takes a classic Eliadean distinction between sacred and profane as an oppositional pairing and then matches that pair with other similar oppositional pairs, such as individual and social, pure and impure, and the presumably disjunct goals of release from rebirth, or liberation from bondage to *saṃsāra* \(*mokṣa*\), and power and pleasure in this world \(*bhoga*\). He diagrams the flow of ritual action between the two realms of sacred and profane, and in doing so creates the image of a wave-like pattern of interaction between the two. Tachikawa adds complexity to this basic image by suggesting that movement between some of the various oppositions can take place within the realm created by the relation between the terms of another opposition. He suggests, for example, that movement from the state of impurity to that of purity can take place within the realm of the sacred, as for instance in the transformation of a deceased person from corpse to spirit \(impure to pure\) within the sacred confines of a funeral ceremony.

In the case of Japanese rituals, Tachikawa suggests that the Mahāyāna equation of *nirvāṇa* and *saṃsāra* has created overlapping categories in the ritual system. He then looks more closely at the actions involved in a Japanese *homa* \(J. *goma* 護摩\), noting that there is a fundamental division between preparatory rites and offerings as such. An overall concern of the essay is to demonstrate the way in which individual, subjective experiences are synthesized into collective ones. This is an important theme for considering the role and efficacy of many public and political rituals, such as those examined by Chaulagain in the next section.



## Textual Studies

The second set of essays have texts per se as their central focus. As discussed earlier, the use of textual sources in many cases requires that scholars ask new questions of already familiar texts. In the previous section, Grether introduces the Avesta into our consideration of the sources relevant to the historical study of the *homa*, and in this section textual sources from the Vedic, Puranic, and Buddhist traditions are added.



### Lubin

Timothy Lubin’s study, “The Vedic *Homa* and the Standardization of Hindu *Pūjā*” looks at the period of transition from the Vedic to Brahmanic eras, when the classic fire offerings required the establishment of three fires. These three fires are found in all of the solemn rites: the householder \(*gārhapatya*\) fire, located on the western side of the ritual enclosure, the southern \(*dakṣiṇāgni*\) fire, which functions to ward off evil influences, and the offering \(*āhavaniya*\) fire, on the eastern side of the ritual enclosure. The presence of these three serve to distinguish the solemn \(*śrauta*\) rites from the simpler, or one might say streamlined, rituals that only require one fire. Lubin renders these latter, that is the *gṛhya* rites as the “homely” rites. Also known as the domestic rites, these take place in the home rather than in a separate ritual enclosure and employ only the “household fire.” This is not the cooking fire in the kitchen, but rather a special ritual fire, maintained in a household chapel. Also important in contrasting the solemn rites from the homely rites is the reduction of the number of ritual officiants needed. The solemn rites can be seen as forming a range of increasing complexity, from the simple, one-day-long offering of *soma*,116 the *agniṣṭoma*, up to the twelve-day-long ritual called “the piling up of Agni” \(*agnicayana*\)—each requiring a corresponding increase in the number of officiants. In contrast, only one officiant is needed for the domestic rites, with the householder himself serving as the ritual sponsor \(*yajamāna*\).

The transition from solemn to domestic rites is important in the historical transformation of Brahmanic ritual, and as Lubin explains, required a new rationale to legitimize these simpler ritual forms. This ritual record evidences a changing socioeconomic situation, which Lubin sees as involving a shift from a model of authority based on leadership within a nomadic band to one based on leadership in an established household.



### Sugiki

Tsunehiko Sugiki gives us a detailed study of sexual symbolism in early Buddhist tantras, that is, from about the ninth to thirteenth centuries. The internalization of ritual action is of particular importance in this discussion, and as indicated earlier there are differing conceptions of what internalization means. Sugiki specifically notes the threefold typology offered by Abhayākaragupta—mental, internal, and supreme.117 Although elsewhere in this volume authors discuss the different kinds of *homa* ritual, such as, the fourfold categorization of pacification, prosperity, bewitchment, and subjugation, Sugiki notes that the internal forms do not follow this kind of categorization—thus indicating that while the external fire ritual can be categorized according to external goals, internalized fire rituals seek other kinds of accomplishments, such as the power of gnosis to “burn up” delusions.

Through careful textual analysis, he has arranged these texts in a progressive sequence. Understood in this fashion, Sugiki’s ordering demonstrates the progress from sexual yoga as practiced physically to its symbolic internalization as what he calls a “psycho-somatic” process, that is, subtle body yoga.

Subtle body yoga requires learning control over the symbolic physiology of subtle winds \(*prāṇa*\), that circulate through the three channels \(*nadi*s\), which themselves pass through lotus-shaped centers \(*cakra*s\). This subtle, or esoteric physiology serves to distinguish different sorts of internalization. Psychosomatic internalization differs both from a visualized performance of the *homa* per se and from a symbolic equation of meditation as a fire that purifies one’s emotional and cognitive obscurations \(*kleśa*\). While the latter understanding of the goal of practice is at play in the works Sugiki examines, the purification is understood in a more literal sense as the fire reaching up into the head and activating the “great bliss” *cakra* \(*mahāsukhacakra*\).



### Gray

David Gray continues the examination of textual sources for understanding the *homa* by turning to an important *homa* ritual manual \(*vidhi*\) attributed to one of the Buddhist *mahāsiddhas*, Kāṇha \(also known as Kṛṣṇācārya\). This manual is itself part of the Cakarasaṃvara tantra cycle of textual materials. Internalization of the *homa* forms an important part of the ritual practice described by Kāṇha, as also found in the contributions by Skorupski and Sugiki in this volume.

Also introduced here is a detail that itself provides a key to tracing the dynamics of change for the *homa*. That is the issue of the categories of rites. In this case, we learn that there are three categories, while as reflected in other essays in this volume there are also sets of four and five categories. While across the tantric tradition these often overlap, there may be other, more divergent systems of organizing tantric rituals yet to be identified. Finally, we note that Kāṇha also makes one of the assertions found repeatedly throughout the tantric traditions, that is, that without *homa* there can be no success.



### Halkias

Georgios Halkias examines another *homa* ritual manual \(*vidhi*\), this one related to an otherwise little known buddha, Aparimitāyus. Like the more familiar and similarly named Amitāyus, one of the buddhas important to the Pure Land tradition, Aparimitāyus can provide the benefit of longevity. Although little known today, Aparimitāyus was a very popular buddha at various times in Buddhist history because of the desire for longevity, and he is found in both Tibetan and Chinese traditions.118

As with Skorupski, Halkias gives us some insight into the way in which Brahmanic *homa*s were rejected by early Buddhism, but then adapted back into the tradition later. This was not the rejection of ritual per se, as some modernizing interpreters would have it. Instead, it is a rejection of the performance of ritual as a means by which monks would earn their livelihood, that is, a means other than mendicancy, and one associated with the taking of animal life. The logics of the symbolism of external and internal again play a role in this process, with the interpretation of the internal dimension as a kind of meditation. This association between external ritual performance and internal meditations provided a rationale making the performance of ritual acceptable within a Buddhist context.

While many of the same terms for various kinds of rituals recur throughout the literature, the number of kinds of rituals varies between different textual traditions. Here, for example, in contrast to the three kinds of *homa*s as found in Gray’s study of Kāṇha’s ritual manual, we now find a set of four different kinds of *homa*s identified in relation to Aparimitāyus. Authorship of this manual is attributed to the Queen of Siddhas, an epithet given to several different legendary figures.



### Wallace

Vesna Wallace’s study looks at the *homa* in relation to the Kalācakra cycle, a tantra widely accepted as the culmination of tantric Buddhist development in India, and held to be the most important tantra by the Gelug tradition, that headed by the Dalai Lama. This is a close study of the ritual requirements and practices for the *homa* in the Kalācakra tradition, providing the kind of detail—such as implements, offerings, color symbolism, and the five functions that the rite can fulfill—that is essential for comparisons that lead to knowledge of the dynamics of ritual change and adaptation.

Important to the study of the Kalācara tradition is the commentary by Vimalaprabhā. Wallace indicates that Vimalaprabhā makes the same distinction between internal and external noted by Halkias. Internal and external are distinguished by the goals that the two kinds of *homa*s can attain—internal *homa*s facilitate attainment of the “supreme indestructible gnosis” \(*paramākṣara-jñāna-siddhi*\), while external *homa*s are of use in more mundane attainments, such as purification and merit-making. It is worth noting in this regard that, as with Sugiki’s comments, “internal” here is not understood as a purely “mental” process. In other words, while the Cartesian dualism of mind and matter may seem “natural” to many of us today, we should not presume that it is universal nor allow it to predetermine our interpretation of these practices. The internal practices discussed by Wallace refer to esoteric physiology, such as the winds, channels, and *cakras* as discussed by Sugiki, rather than to a mental or psychological dimension of human existence.



### Orzech

Charles Orzech’s contribution to this collection, “Ritual Subjects: *Homa* in Chinese Translations and Manuals from the Sixth through Eighth Centuries,” vividly demonstrates the importance of the textual record for understanding history—not just the religious history of China but also of India. The developmental sequence that he traces over the course of three centuries is not just about Chinese developments, but serve as reflections of developments in Indian tantric Buddhism over that same historical arc. These Chinese language texts are extensions of the medieval Indian ritual world into East Asia. Orzech notes an important distinction between the use of the *homa* in China and in Japan. In Japan it came to be part of the publicly available technology of tantric Buddhism, while in China it remained the preserve of monastic and imperial elites. In present-day Japan, for example, it is possible for members of the general public to have *homa*s performed for a variety of different purposes, performances that they attend in a fashion similar to the sponsor \(*yajamāna*\) of Vedic rites.

Orzech notes an important transitional point in the development of the tantric Buddhist *homa*. That is in the shift from the use of fire in image consecration, where the image is the focus of the rite and the object in which the deities are made present, to the fire itself being the focus of ritual action, and itself the object in which the deities are made present. Equally important is the development of the interior or visualized ritual performance in relation to the exterior *homa*, performed physically.

This aspect of later *homa* instructions leads Orzech to consider the ways in which ritual practice formed the social persona. Contrary to the rhetoric of the isolated individual, an image dating from Upanishadic texts, Orzech points out that ritual is a highly public matter and the self being formed is a public one as well. At the same time, the creation of an interior ritual space is the creation of an interiorized sense of self as both ritual agent and ritual object.



## Descriptive Studies

As indicated already, all of the studies in this collection employ a textual basis of some kind. This last set, however, shift the methodological emphasis to a more descriptive mode, while still drawing on textual sources.



### Lewis and Bajracharya

Although long marginal to the mainstream of study of South Asian religions, the Newar Buddhist tradition forms an important area of inquiry, and this essay focuses on the *homa* ritual of that tradition. With a hereditary priesthood, Newar Buddhism—not unlike Japanese and some forms of Buddhism found in China—diverges from the common expectation of monastic celibacy. Nepal, also the location for Chaulagain’s study in this section, is marked by a relatively strong tradition of coexistence of Buddhist and Hindu forms of religion. Lewis and Bajracharya provide historical background on the development of Buddhism in Nepal, including relations with the now predominant Hindu religious culture. The primary form of Buddhism in Nepal is the Vajrayāna, and this is reflected in the stupas and monasteries, statues and images created by the community, as well as being the basis of the ritual culture. The important textual bases for the Newar tradition’s *homa* practices include the Kālacakra and the Cakrasaṃvara tantras, discussed by Wallace and Gray, respectively, in this collection.

The Newar tradition includes a wide range of different *homa*s, which the authors discuss in order to demonstrate “the flexibility and depth of Newar Buddhist homa ritualism.” Within the Newar Buddhist society, *homa*s are mandatory at the times of death and mourning, and also at the end of other cycles of ritual performances. Other kinds of rituals within the religious culture, such as life cycle rituals and construction rituals, may optionally include the *homa* as part of their performance.

The authors provide a very detailed presentation of a standard Newar Buddhist *homa* ritual. This examination shows the way in which standard units of ritual activity, what the authors call “praxis units,” are organized to create a specific ritual performance. They proceed after this detailed description to discuss several different specific rituals and their applications, including not only the construction rites already mentioned but also consecrations.



### Chaulagain

Also working in the Nepalese context, Nawaraj Chaulagain examines one of the most important political rituals for the Hindu royalty, the *Navarātra*. This is a nine-day ceremony which, contrary to common expectation of Hindu practice, involves the sacrifice of animals and the burning of their livers as part of the *homa* offerings. Although originally performed for the benefit of the king, the ceremony continues into the present as a national festival.

This ritual is devoted to the terrifying goddess Kālī, who is homologized with Devi Mahāmaya, the Great Goddess of Illusion, as well as with the “Ultimate Śakti”—the feminine divine force that is foundational to all being. Textually, the ritual draws upon the Devi Mahātmya for part of the recitations included in its performance. Unlike the rituals in which deities are evoked into a ritual space, in this case the goddess is “awakened” in the center of a *yantra* with eight points, each of which is occupied by one of eight goddesses.

During the course of the nine days of the Navarātra, several different *homa* rituals are performed. One involves the consecration of weapons, a ritual in this case closely modeled on Vedic forms of ritual offerings. Another is performed on the eighth and ninth nights, which are identified with Durgā, and considered the dark nights. On these nights the practitioner performs an esoteric *homa* involving the burning of the liver of a sacrificial animal—a black goat with a black tongue.

Chaulagain also explores the significance of the symbolic means by which connections or equivalences \(*bandhu* or *nidāna*\) are established between ritual elements. Particularly important for the *homa* is ritual identification between the sacrificer, sacrifice, and the deity receiving the sacrifice. This is effectively identical with ritual identification in Shingon Buddhist *homa* as discussed by Payne in this collection. In the Shingon version of ritual identification the mouth of the altar hearth is identified with the mouth of both the deity evoked and the practitioner, the fire is both the digestive fire of the deity and the wisdom fire of the practitioner’s own gnosis, and the offerings made are the practitioner’s own obscurations \(*kleśa*\), which are transformed by the fire and purified as offerings to the deity.

Chaulagain closes his study with an comparative examination of the symbolism of the liver across many different religious traditions, and a consideration of the magical basis also common across traditions. His final discussion looks at the relation of the Navarātra rituals with the broader Indic category of Śakta tantra.



### Payne

The quasi-shamanic tradition of Shugendō is widely known for the practice of austerities conducted in the mountains of Japan. Historically, Shugendō has drawn on esoteric Buddhism, both Tendai and Shingon, for symbolism and practices. These borrowings from Esoteric Buddhism became very strong during the Tokugawa era \(1603–1868\), when the shogunate required all Shugendō practitioners to become directly affiliated with either the Tendai or Shingon institutions. Since the establishment of freedom of religion in the Japanese constitution of Japan \(1947\), however, these affiliations have weakened and the connection of Esoteric Buddhist symbolism and practice with Shugendō has weakened as well.

Very striking is the outdoor performance of the *homa*, known as the Shugendō *saitō goma*. As with Gray and Halkias in this collection, the textual basis for this study is a ritual manual, in this case augmented by personal observation of several instances of the ritual in the early 1980s. While traditionally part of the system of mountain retreats, Shugendō practitioners also frequently perform their *saitō goma* as a stand-alone ritual in public venues.

Drawing on Zürcher’s proposed typology of appropriation, originally developed for explicating the relations between Daoism and Buddhism in China, Payne suggests extending that with a syntactic analysis of rituals. In examining the Shugendō *saitō goma*, Payne specifically proposes a two-dimensional comparison so as to understand the dynamics of ritual appropriation more clearly. One axis would be the comparison of the *saitō goma* with another, more basic Shugendō ritual, that known as the Fudō hō, which provides the structural framework for the more complex *saitō goma*. The other axis would be a comparison of the Shugendō *homa* with that found in the esoteric Buddhist traditions of Japan, such as the Shingon *homa*.



### Witzel

The final essay is Michael Witzel’s “*Agnihotra* Rituals in Nepal.” As a fire ritual performed very regularly as part of Brahmanic Vedic culture, the *agnihotra* constitutes a key element in the symbolic and ritual milieu in which the *homa* developed, and in relation to which it continues to be performed today. As discussed above by Chaulagain and by Lewis and Bajracharya, the two kinds of rituals—*homa*s and *agnihotra*s—coexist in the same ritual universe of present-day Nepal.

Witzel gives a wide-ranging survey of the complexities of the *agnihotra* in Nepal. His research ranges over the history of the movement of the ritual into Nepal, detailed comparisons of its performance in two separate sites of long-term performance \(*agniśālā*\), symbolic significances, and social considerations regarding the status of the *agnihotri*. Rather than the uniformity of practice that might be expected, given that four of the five different groups of Brahmins in the area all follow the Mādhyandina recension of the White Yajurveda, Witzel’s research in the Kathmandu Valley reveals a variety of differences in the ritual’s performance.

In the valley there are four *agnihotra* rituals maintained. Two of these are modern revivals, while the other two date back centuries and are the focus of Witzel’s inquiry. He gives a close comparison of these two, discussing similarities and difference between the *agnihotra* performed at Patan and at Paśupatināth. The Patan Agnihotra is well attested in a series of manuscripts going back to 1433 CE. They show increasing localization \(“Newarization”\) of the ritual and a development from a royal ritual to a local version that involves the citizens of Patan and surroundings. The Paśupatināth Agnihotra is entirely based on oral tradition though a printed text has been available for more than 150 years.

As regional practices, aspects of Vedic religion no longer extant elsewhere are found as part of the *agnihotra* in Nepal. For example, the figure of Mitrāvaruṇa is revered during the ritual, a figure that combines the two deities, Mitra and Varuṇa, into one. Elsewhere only Varuṇa has survived into post-Vedic religious culture and, although once the king of the gods, remains in the diminished position of lord of the ocean.

Another important local development is a dual summoning of the deity. In one step, the summons is “by meditation and infusion into the fire of the conventional \(*samaya*\), mentally created god.” The second is by evocation \(*avāhana*\), and then the two are joined together. Witzel points out that there is a convergence here between Vedic and tantric—“Apparently it is only at this one location in Indian culture that the Vedic *agnihotra* ritual has undergone a development to a typical tantric ritual, a real and quite special local development.”


