+++
title = "06 The Consecration of the Monastic Compound at Mount Koya by Kukai"

+++

David L. Gardiner  

Although Japanese Buddhism is probably best known in popular circles for its  rich tradition of Zen teachings and practices, from a historical perspective it is  plausible to contend that no form has had more of a pervasive impact on the  overall development of Japanese religion than the esoteric or Tantric Buddhist  schools known in Japan as mikkyo ("secret teaching"). Mikkyo was first formally  represented in the Tendai and Shingon schools founded in the early ninth century,  but its roots are discernible in the eighth century and its branches, to continue  the metaphor, extend throughout virtually all the subsequent schools that  emerged in the Kamakura period (around the thirteenth century), in particular  in the Zen, Pure Land, and Nichiren schools, where its presence bore significant  and recognizable fruits. Among the variety of ways mikkyo seems to have influ enced religious expressions other than those formally identifiable as Tantric are  the inclusion of elaborate rites with a profusion of liturgical paraphernalia, the  employment of dharanis or mantras in recitation of prayers, and the utilization  of some form of painted mandala diagrams. In addition to these more concrete  instances, one might add the basic religious paradigm that mikkyo offered, which  encompassed elements such as the perfect identity of practitioner and Buddha (in  body, speech, as well as mind) and the generally affirmative view of the ordinary  world as being a manifestation of the sacred body of the Buddha.  

Kukai and Mount Koya  

Kukai was the founder of the Shingon school, which has long stood as the most  exclusively Tantric form of Buddhist practice in Japan. Shingon means "true  word," and is derived from the Chinese"translation of the Sanskrit word mantra.  Although the Tendai and other Buddhist schools incorporated Tantric elements 

120 DAVI D L. GARDINE R  

into their study and practice, the Shingon school prides itself on being less eclectic  than any other. The two texts translated below chronicle ceremonies associated  with Kukai's founding of the monastery named Kongobuji (Temple of the Vajra  Peak, named after the Vajrasekhara sutra) on Mount Koya. Of the various mon 

asteries at which Kukai lived and worked, none held as much significance for him  as Kongobuji. The temple complex, together with the surrounding community of  Koyasan that occupies the top of Mount Koya, has remained as an important  center for Japanese religion for nearly 1,200 years. Koyasan is located two hours  south by train from Osaka in the hills of Wakayama prefecture. It continues today  to draw around one million tourists a year, many of whom perform a pilgrimage  to Kukai's tomb, where many believe the master (some call him a saint) still sits  in meditation awaiting the future Buddha, or to the gravesite of a relative - for  the mountaintop houses probably the largest, and surely the grandest, cemetery  in all Japan. Mount Koya is one of Japan's greatest holy spots and, because it has  served for many centuries as a thriving religious center, it stands as a repository  of a fabulous cultural and artistic heritage.  

The first text below touches briefly on Kukai's relation to the mountain. It notes  that after he had returned from studying esoteric Buddhism in the Tang capital  of China for two years, he sought far and wide for a suitable location to build a  monastery devoted to its practice. In a letter he wrote in 816 C.E. requesting the  Japanese emperor to bestow the land to him, he indicated that he came to know  the area when he had passed through it during his younger peripatetic days as a  mountain ascetic practitioner. Although it is accurate to say that he founded the  monastic compound of Kongobuji, it would be misleading (though in accordance  with popular legend) to assert that Kukai "discovered" Mount Koya as a holy spot.  The mountains of Yoshino just to the east had for generations been favorite  grounds for practitioners of various spiritual disciplines, and it is clear that Mount  Koya had seen the footsteps of many a seeker. Kukai indicates in his writings that  he may have employed some geomantic methods for discerning that it was a suit able location for a monastery. Yet it is also evident that the simple facts that it is a  large basin of approximately four square miles at the top of a three-thousand-foot  peak, with good running water and sufficient distance from the urban life of either  Nara or Kyoto (a few days' travel away), were all points in its favor.  

The two texts translated below chronicle rites that mark the establishment of  the grounds as a monastery. The texts themselves are not dated, but other reliable  documents that can be dated, and that are likely to have been produced shortly  before and after these rites, indicate that the rites must have taken place in 818  or 819. In his 816 letter requesting the emperor to permit him to use the mountain  for a monastery, Kukai indicated that there were not enough religious centers  situated in quiet mountains in Japan. He cited the scripture Dainichi-kyo (Mahd 

vairocana-sutra) as recommending isolated mountain spots as ideal for the practice  of meditation. A text dated one month after Kukai's request purportedly docu ments the emperor's permission to build a center, but the authenticity of this  letter has been called into question on several points. Nevertheless, various cor-

CONSECRATIO N AT MOUN T KOYA 121  

respondences reveal that Kukai dispatched some of his disciples to the mountain  in 818 to begin to construction there and that he intended to follow them shortly  afterward. Letters he sent to acquaintances in Kyoto and elsewhere reveal that he  resided on the mountain for about eight months from the winter of 818 until the  summer of 819, and it is likely that the present texts were composed during this  period. This was twelve years after he had returned from his studies in China.  

When Kukai returned in 806 from Tang China, where he had studied as a  Japanese government-sponsored "foreign student," he was not well known in  court circles. It took several years for him to develop contacts with important  senior monks (such as the Tendai founder Saicho), influential court officials, and  eventually the Emperor Saga, whose interest in things that were vogue in Chinese  literary and cultural circles is legendary. Before establishing his center on Mount  Koya, he did manage the affairs of a few temples near the capital, such as the  Jingoji on Mount Takao. Jingoji served Kukai well, as it was an older temple with  strong connections to established court families. While residing there he per formed two very significant initiation ceremonies into Shingon Tantric practice,  which scores of well-known monks and lay aristocrats attended. This allowed him  both to gain some repute as a new specialist in an attractive tradition, and to  gather some able disciples. But it seems that for many years Kukai desired to build  a place far from the busy life of the capital that would be dedicated solely to the  training of students in Shingon practice. In fact, a letter survives in which he tells  a friend of a vow that he had made en route back from China to do just that. It  appears that when his ship had encountered a severe ocean storm, he had prom ised the gods that if he were allowed to arrive safely in Japan he would generate  great benefits in the world by establishing a center devoted to the practice of the  Tantric Buddhism he had learned in China. Other letters also indicate that his  building of the complex at the top of Mount Koya was indeed an expression of  his commitment to realize this vow.  

The construction of the Kongobuji monastery, however, did not proceed  quickly. Its distance from the capital, coupled with Kukai's many responsibilities  there, permitted neither the procurement of supplies nor the management of labor  to run smoothly. By the time of Kukai's death in 835, it is not likely that more  than a few buildings had been completed: a stupa, a worship hall, and a residence  for monks, From 823, Kukai became engaged in supervising the completion of  the Toji temple in the capital. The construction of this important temple at the  southern entrance to Kyoto had languished for several years, and the invitation  to Kukai to revitalize the project was both a clear indication of his growing rep utation and a stepping stone to other obligations in the capital. His correspon 

dence reveals that, as his duties in Kyoto expanded due to his newly found prom inence, he felt frustrated at becoming increasingly distanced from his dream to  build a center on Mount Koya. In 832, he led Kongobuji's first large ceremony  of offering to the Buddha, known as the mandoe or ceremony of ten thousand  lamps, a ritual that had a long tradition in major Japanese Buddhist temples of  Nara. Soon afterward he pleaded with the court to be released from his respon-

122 DAVI D L . GARDINE R  

sibilities in the capital - he had recently been appointed in Kyoto to the high ranking position of a chief supervisor of monks - in order that he might return  to his retreat at Mount Koya. One of his reasons for requesting retirement was  his ailing health, and indeed it was not long after his return there in 834 that he  passed away, on the mountain, in the third month of 835, at the age of sixty-two.  The supervision of the construction was left to his disciple Shinzen, who made  much progress during the next twenty years.  

The Consecration Rite  

The particular ritual for which these texts stand as our introduction is known in  Japanese as kekkai, meaning "to bind a realm." The Japanese term is derived from  the Chinese translation of the Sanskrit sima-bandha. Buddhist texts on vinaya, or  monastic rituals and regulations, apparently used the term in non- or pre-Tantric  contexts to refer to the prescribed rules serving to formally separate the monastic  community from lay communities in terms of such categories as spatial demar 

cation and restrictions regarding clothing and food. In Japanese history, kekkai  has generally denoted the divisions between monastic and lay territory. There are  signposts known as kekkai stones that stand at the entrance to some temple  buildings (especially ones set aside for assiduous contemplative practice), which  frequently contain the engraved admonition that women, alcohol, and garlic are  not permitted beyond the sign. The term may also refer to the railing (commonly  wooden) within a temple building that separates the altar, on which Buddha  images usually stand, from the surrounding space for worshipers. The kekkai thus  demarcates sacred and profane space, and might be considered in the Japanese  context to circumscribe an area in which the healing/saving power of deity is seen  to be concentrated.  

These two texts were most likely recited as prayers before or during the con secration rites. Furthermore, much in the way that the Shinto tradition recites  norito (formal prayers to a diety) under similar circumstances, the texts are ad dressed to deities in the form of announcements of what will transpire. The core  of this announcement, however, is the actual invitation of the deities to enter the  realm under consideration, thereby sacralizing and protecting it. The kekkai rite  described by Kukai for the founding of Kongobuji declares the bounded realm to  be an area with a radius of seven ri, or approximately two to three miles. Although  some scholars have noted that this distance seems to fit quite naturally with certain  geographical features of the area surrounding Mount Koya, it is also a distance  that has some precedence in Buddhist literature. Chinese translations of the bi ography of Sakyamuni Buddha give an account of how the naga (a serpentine  deity) king Mucilinda made a gigantic umbrella-like covering that protected the  Buddha, which extended for a radius of seven ri (about two miles). There also  exist Chinese Tantric texts that describe rites aimed at protecting an area desig nated by the same distance. Some kekkai rites performed in Japan prior to Kukai's 

CONSECRATIO N AT MOUN T KOYA 123  

day were known as "binding the realm of the nation" (kokudo kekkai), and seem  to have had a protective purpose, albeit less explicitly related to Tantric texts and  deities than was Kukai's kekkai. Most Japanese encyclopedias note the rites Kukai  performed for Kongobuji in their entries for kekkai. The Shingon tradition rec 

ognizes three types, or scales, of kekkai. The largest is the "binding the realm of  the nation," and some scholars say that the rites in the texts below fall into this  category because of the vast area they designate (this interpretation implies that  "nation" might simply indicate "land"). The two other kekkai rites are for a temple  building and for an altar within such a building.  

In Indian Buddhist Tantric ritual, the term sima-bandha sometimes referred to  "binding" the area of a horizontal mandala platform, which was often constructed  on a raised earthen surface. Pillars known as kilas were inserted into the circum ference of the platform and a multicolored thread was tied around their tips to  create a ring around the platform. There were also rites known as sima-bandha  that purified a given area by expelling evil forces from the ground level, the air  above the ground, and even from the area beneath the ground. Kukai's texts follow  a similar pattern because their central aim seems to be the elimination of obstruc tive spirits from the area and the invitation of helpful ones to stay. It is worthy  of note that the native Japanese Shinto tradition also uses the word "binding"  (musubi) to refer to the demarcation of sacred space.  

Related Texts and Deities  

Apart from their overall purpose, and the fact that the second ceremony took  seven days and involved a number of deities named by him, we have little concrete  knowledge about the actual rites performed by Kukai. The primary deity of the  second text is Kundali, who is called a "knowledge king" (vidydrdja in Sanskrit,  myoo in Japanese); Kukai indicates that he will rely on a "Kundali rite" for this  consecration. There are a variety of Chinese texts containing rites that center on  this deity, including one written by Amoghavajra, the great Tantric adept of the  Tang dynasty who instructed Kukai's master Huiguo. Kundali is said to manifest  a fierce or wrathful appearance and is known as a destroyer of obstacles. In the  Buddhist Tantric symbol system, he is often connected with Vajragarbha Bodhi sattva as well as Ratnasambhava Buddha, and is associated with the southern  direction.  

A number of other deities are mentioned in the second text, including Sakya muni Buddha, Avalokitesvara, and the Medicine Buddha from the Buddhist tra dition; the non-Buddhist Brahma and Indra; other unnamed heavenly beings (ten  in Japanese, a common rendering of the Sanskrit deva), and a variety of Japanese  spirits, most notably the souls of the imperial line and the ancestors of members  of the court. The rite targets in particular the enemies of the Buddha-dharma  known as the vinayakas, who are depicted as potential obstructors to the spread  of Kukai's Shingon practice, in opposition to the aforenamed deities, who are 

124 DAVI D L . GARDINE R  

called upon as protectors. The vinayakas are commonly portrayed in the Buddhist  literature as opponents of the Dharma. Twice Kukai repeats the phrase that the  vinayaka, who destroy the true Dharma, and other maleficent spirits should get  out of his newly established grounds to the distance of seven ri.  

The Mandala  

Because both texts refer to the Shingon Buddhist mandala, the concept needs  some elaboration. The first text begins with a proclamation to the "oceanlike  assembly" of the two great mandalas, which are the Diamond and Womb Realms.  These mandalas are often represented in colorful painted form with intricate geo 

metrical designs that incorporate myriad deities. In short, the mandalas are visual  representations of two simultaneous, overlapping aspects of the enlightened mind  variously described either as emptiness and form, wisdom and compassion, or  subject and object. Essential to a proper understanding of these mandalas is the  recognition that they are symbols for actual realities - pictorial embodiments of  dimensions of the experience of a buddha. They represent a dimension of awak ening from which a practitioner is guided, from the buddha's side so to speak - and toward which s/he developes through spiritual aspiration and specific meth 

ods. In essence, the Shingon practitioner is taught to believe that the mandala  represents an as yet unmanifested dimension of his/her own experience: an origi nal buddhahood residing within. Thus the painted form, together with the vi sualizations, prayers, and ritual gestures of the contemplative regime, serve as a  catalyst to this potential manifestation, which could be described as an inner  transformation. The mandala can thus be understood both as a means and an  end of religious practice. Kukai's use of the term mandala focuses on its role as  a description of the sacrality or sacredness of the world of enlightened experience,  a sacrality that manifests when the true purity of one's mind is realized. At the  same time, one can say that the sacrality of a geographical realm is also a potency  that already resides within the land, which is made manifest in conjunction with  an individual's own spiritual realization. Speaking of the mandala in both of these  senses - as both catalyst and aim - Kukai writes in the first text of his "trans mission" of the esoteric Buddhist teachings (which are also called a mandala) to  India and then ultimately to Japan, that "Mafmvairocana Buddha, the great com passionate one, enjoying for himself the taste of the equality that is enlightenment,  was saddened by the plight of the beings in the six realms of rebirth. And so it  was that the thunder of his wisdom that is one with reality trembled throughout  the Dharma realm, and the secret mandala was thereby transmitted to our world."  

When later in the text he mentions how he "safely returned [from China] with  the two mandalas of the Diamond and the Womb realms," it is to the actual  paintings on cloth that he refers. A little later he again mentions them by saying  that he intends to "establish both the great mandalas" on Mount Koya. But here  it seems that he is indicating not so much the paintings, nor even their trans 

mogrification into the statues inside stupas that did take place on the mountain, 

CONSECRATIO N A T MOUN T KOYA 125  

but rather more significantly the actual engagement in the practice of the reali zation of these sacred realms of experience within the practitioner. It was this  practice at the heart of the Shingon tradition that Kukai wished to establish at  Mount Koya. And so it was natural for him to regard a location that was dedicated  to such noble aims as a sacred space.  

But the concept of the sacred space of the mandala can extend beyond that of  just the immediate religious precinct of Mount Koya. It is equally likely that Kukai  believed that by "establishing the two mandates" at Kongobuji he was creating a  

sacred center for all of Japan, thereby consecrating the entire land by his act. The  area around Mount Koya was already in Kukai's time a popular site for practi tioners of asceticism, but its transformation into a major center of esoteric Bud dhist practice from the early ninth century onward represented the emergence of  a remarkably visible "power spot" in Japan. Earlier sacred mountains of Buddhist  history easily come to mind: China's Tian-tai and Wu-tai mountains, as well as  the holy Grdhrakuta in India where the Buddha himself is said to have preached.  In the case of Wu-tai shan, where the Tantric master Bu-kong (Amoghavajra)  established a center for a national cult of the bodhisattva of wisdom Manjusri, we  may see something like a model for Kukai's vision for Mount Koya, which became  one of Japan's most sacred mountains. An irony in this case might be that, instead  of a heavenly bodhisattva such as Manjusri serving as the focus as in the case of  Wu-tai shan, at Koya, beside some interest in a cult devoted to the future Buddha  Maitreya in which Kukai himself displayed some zeal, the main object of worship  assuring the locale's sacrality became the holy relic of Kukai's own body, which  many faithful still believe remains in meditative equipoise today.  

The second text focuses on the "Assembly of the Dharma Altar," where Kukai  states that for one week he would, in order to consecrate the realm, offer worship  to the buddhas of all directions (throughout the reaches of the universe) and to  other deities. The title of this text indicates that it was written for the kekkai of  the "altar place" (danjo), an expression that connotes the platform on which  various deity statues are placed as a three-dimensional mandala. In this case  the meaning of mandala is more concrete. Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that the  sense here of an altar as a horizontal platform for the mandala, which was  the original style in early Tantric Buddhism in India, may resonate better with  the broader spiritual sense of mandala, in both a visual and a somatic (because  three-dimensional) sense, than does the vertically hanging painted form. It is also  noteworthy that in spite of the second text's apparent focus on consecrating an  altar, the area said to be "bound" by the rite consists nevertheless of a radius of  seven ri.  

Conclusions  

The esoteric Buddhist rites to which these texts refer, related as they are to the  consecration of religious space, may in some sense be considered magical or at  least apotropaic, a term that indicates the warding off of evil forces by ritual 

1 2 6 DAVI D L. GARDINE R  

means. But equally characteristic of these and similar esoteric Buddhist rites is  the invocation of beneficial forces to protect the realm. It is commonplace to  acknowledge the extent to which the emergence of Buddhist Tantra introduced  entirely new rites into the repertoire of Buddhist monastic specialists. Nonethe 

less, we know that the historical Buddha affirmed the existence of spiritual beings,  whether of the heavenly or ghostly realms. Biographies also report that part of  his daily routine included the teaching of deities that came for instruction in the  Dharma. We also know that he acknowledged the effectiveness of particular in 

cantations (pantos) for protection against harmful animals. But we do not possess  any accounts of his performing rites like the ones Kukai documents here, whose  aim is to invoke and expel spiritual forces from the sahgha residence. However,  without going back to the lifetime of the Buddha, a period for which we have  little historical evidence, it is possible to confirm that certain beliefs inherent in  Kukai's rites, in particular those regarding the efficacy that monastic rituals may  have over the spirit realms, can be traced to an early stage in Indian Buddhism.  We know, for example, that monks (even the more scholastically trained, learned  ones) often performed and sponsored rites to benefit the spirits of their ancestors.  Recent research reveals that, contrary to a common scholarly misconception that  the practice of ancestor veneration entered Buddhism only after the religion had  been transported to China, and equally contrary to the normative textual descrip tions of monastic regulations, Indian Buddhist monks engaged in rituals that  aimed to "manipulate" spiritual beings and ancestors. Thus, regardless of whatever  Buddhist monks may have written about what they ought to have been doing,  we can verify that they did perform rituals for the benefit of spirits.  

Kukai also wrote many texts contained in the Shoryoshu (a collection of his  miscellaneous writings from which the present texts are taken) that commemorate  rites performed on behalf of persons recently deceased. However, the rites dis cussed in the present texts include references not only to ancestral spirits - in  this case of the imperial family and members of the court - but to a variety of  "heavenly" beings (many of Indian origin), as well as to autochthonous spirits of  Japan. In fact, in all of Kukai's writings that document rituals, those translated  below appear to be the only two in which he mentions such spirits. There must  have been some great significance to the fact that it was only in the consecration  of the monastic compound at Mount Koya that he chose to call upon such spirits  for aid. One explanation for this may be found in the striking parallels between  these rites performed by Kukai and similar rites for the consecration of an area  that are central to the native Shinto traditions that he surely knew well. This  significance is clearly mirrored today in the presence on Mount Koya, at the heart  of the compound near the central Great Stupa, of a large shrine dedicated to the  local deity known as Koya Myojin, where rites continue to be performed on a  daily basis. It is justifiable to conclude that the symbolic and cosmic acts of  consecration and invocation are to be renewed on a continual basis, albeit perhaps  on a smaller scale.  

The two documents translated below are preserved in a collection of Kukai's 

CONSECRATION AT MOUNT KOYA 127  

writings known as the Shoryoshu (sometimes read Seireishu). In most printed edi tions, they correspond to the texts numbered 99 and 100. The Shoryoshu is a  collection of over one hundred poems, letters, documents commemorating rituals  (as in the present case), and other miscellaneous materials. Although the Shoryoshu  does not contain any of Kukai's major doctrinal works, many of its texts portray  esoteric Buddhist theories as refracted through the lens of actual practice, thereby  revealing how Shingon Buddhism took shape in its initial stages, during his life time. The Shoryoshu is thus an important historical resource for understanding  the concrete means by which Kukai propagated Shingon Buddhism. The trans lations here are based on texts 99 and 100 of Katsumata Shunkyo's Kobodaishi  Chosaku Zenshu, vol. 3 (Tokyo: Sankibo Busshorin, 1968), pp. 392-96. The earlier  Chinese source from which much of the language in Kukai's second text derives  is located in Taisho vol. 18, text no. 901, p. 813c. Kukai's later ritual writings  bear a great similarity to various texts found in this same Taisho vol. 18.  

Further Reading  

The best introduction to Kukai's life and thought, which includes translations of  some important doctrinal works, remains Yoshito Hakeda, Kukai: Major Works  (New York: Columbia University Press, 1972). A good source for more details on  theory and practice in Shingon Buddhism is Taiko Yamasaki, Shingon: Japanese  Esoteric Buddhism (Boston: Shambhala, 1988). My dissertation covers in depth  several factors involved in Kukai's introduction of Shingon into Japan: "Kukai and  the Beginnings of Shingon Buddhism in Japan" (Stanford University, 1995). On  the significance of the mandala concept, both as philosophy for the sake of in dividual practice and as incorporated into the design of the Kongobuji monastic  compound, see my "Mandala, Mandala on the Wall: Variations of Usage in the  Shingon School," Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 19.2  (1996): 245-79. Finally, a partial translation of each of the present texts, as part  of a discussion of the influence of esoteric Buddhist concepts of space on Japanese  religion, is presented in Allan G. Grapard, "Flying Mountains and Walkers of  Emptiness: Toward a Definition of Sacred Space in Japanese Religions," History  of Religions 21.3 (February 1982): 195-221.  

Text of Declaration for the First Consecration at the Founding of  Mount Koya  

The sramana (monk) Henjo Kongo (Universally Illuminating Vajra) respect fully declares to the buddhas of the ten directions, to the oceanlike assembly  of the Two Great Mandalas, to the five kinds of devas and the heavenly and  earthly divinities of this land, as well ay to the various spirits of earth, water,  fire, wind, and sky of this mountain:128 DAVI D L. GARDINE R  

That which possesses both form and consciousness is necessarily endowed  with Buddha nature. Buddha nature and Dharma nature pervade the entire  Dharma realm and are inseparable: this body and that body are of one essence  and so are equal. One who has awakened to this truth always roams freely in  the realm of the five wisdoms of Mahavairocana Buddha, whereas those lost  and unaware are constantly sinking in the mud of the three realms of desire,  form, and formlessness that comprise samsara. Mahavairocana Buddha, the  great compassionate one, enjoying for himself the taste of the equality that is  enlightenment, was saddened by the plight of the beings in the six realms of  rebirth. And so it was that the thunder of his wisdom that is one with reality  trembled throughout the Dharma realm and the secret mandala was thereby  transmitted to our world. It was passed on to Vajrasattva, to Nagarjuna and  down to the present without a break in continuity. Vajrabodhi and Amogha vajra came east, bearing their staffs from India to China, and transmitted the  esoteric teaching in order to liberate all beings. And yet, here across the broad  ocean in Japan, worthy vessels of this teaching had yet to appear and so the  teaching remained hidden in the secret palace of Mahavairocana without being  transmitted to our land.  

Fortunately, due to the power of the grace of the Buddha and the forces that  mature beings for spiritual work, I was able to travel to Tang China in 804,  whence I safely returned with the two mandalas of the Diamond and the Womb  realms and over one hundred scrolls of Vajrayana scriptures. Still, people in  Japan were not ready and the time was not right. Month after month passed  in rapid succession and it is now more than twelve years since I returned. At  last, since our devout sovereign has taken it upon himself to help promote this  teaching, we are in need simply of a place to practice. I have searched far and  wide and am convinced that Mount Koya is a most suitable location. The  sovereign, deciding to spread this teaching, has granted the mountain for this  purpose. The location was deemed proper after careful divination in all direc tions. Thus will a monastic complex be constructed on this land bestowed by  the sovereign.  

And so, in order to repay above the kindness of the buddhas by spreading  the esoteric teaching, and to augment below the resplendence of the five kinds  of deities by liberating sentient beings, in sole reliance upon the secret teaching  of the Vajrayana, I wish to establish both the great mandalas of the Womb and  Diamond realms. With reverence I beseech all the buddhas to rejoice in, and  all the devas to protect, my efforts here and ask that all virtuous spirits vow to  help realize my wishes.  

To the east, west, south, and north, and in the four intermediate directions,  as well as above and below, within a circumference of seven ri: all maleficent  spirits and deities within this area, each and every one, get out of my sacred  ground. All beneficent deities and spirits in this area, those who can bestow  advantage, may reside as you please. 

CONSECRATION AT MOUNT KOYA 129  

Further, I request that from all directions, may the five kinds of devas, the  deities of the five elements of earth, water, fire, wind, and sky, together with  the revered spirits of the emperors and empresses of the court since its incep tion, and all the divinities of heaven and earth: may all these serve as sponsors  of this place of religious practice. I most humbly beseech that all spiritual  presences offer their protection day and night to help to realize this wish.  Respectfully declared.  

Text of Declaration for the Consecration of an Altar at Mount Koya  

I respectfully declare to all the buddhas, Prajfta, vajra-devas, and all the visible  and invisible spirits still bound in the paths of karma: I hereby declare that  this is my land. I will now set up, for seven days and seven nights, a great  assembly on the Dharma altar. There I will worship all the buddhas, world 

honored ones, in the ten directions of the Dharma realm; Prajna-paramita; the  many bodhisattvas with their followers, and I will firmly establish the teaching  that is hard to comprehend and which is the repository of all esoteric dharmas.  By thus availing myself of the superior power of these teachings, I will perform  rites to protect myself and these sacred precincts.  

In the east, west, south, and north of this compound, in the four intermediate  directions and above and below, all the vinayakas who destroy the true Dharma,  maleficent spirits and deities, every single one here: get out of the area of my  sacred precincts, to the distance of seven ri. If there be beneficent deities and  spirits who protect the true Dharma, who will bring advantage to my Buddha  Dharma, you may remain in this compound as you please.  

Before an image of the Tathagata in this compound, with one mind in har mony with the Dharma, many monks will maintain the practice of the Buddha  dharma, repay our gratitude to the four benefactors (of parents, kings, sentient  beings, and the Three Jewels), and bring vast benefits to all beings. In reliance  upon the rites of Kundali bodhisattva, for seven days and seven nights we will  perform the ceremonies for establishing the sacred boundary, undergo repen tance and engage in worship.  

Within this monastic compound, to the east, west, south, and north, in the  four intermediate directions and above and below, all the vinayakas who de stroy the true Dharma, maleficent spirits and deities, every single one here: get  out of the area of my sacred precincts, to the distance of seven ri. If there be  beneficent deities and spirits who protect the true Dharma, who will bring  advantage to my Buddha Dharma, you may remain in this compound as you  please.  

With the sincerest of hearts I invoke the palace of the Three Jewels, our most  revered teacher Sakyamuni Buddha, the greatly dignified and powerful divine  heart mantras, the excellent protector and liberator Avalokitesvara, Vajra Kun-

130 DAVI D L . GARDINE R  

dali bodhisattva and the two Medicine King bodhisattvas who deliver from  suffering, along with their holy assemblies, Vajra-garbha-raja bodhisattva and  his holy assembly, Brahma, Indra, the four Deva kings, the Nagas - all the  deities and holy beings who protect the Dharma - I implore you all to enter  this place of religious practice to assure the success of these rites. Please accept  my request with pity. 
