+++
title = "08 Precepts for an Emperor"

+++

Allan G. Grapard  

The document translated here represents the views of Kukai (774-835) on ritual  and power, and gives insights into his articulation of the relationship between  esoteric Buddhism and the imperial cultic system of Japan at the beginning of the  Heian period (794-1185). This document was written for an important occasion:  Emperor Heizei (774-824), who had withdrawn from public life in 809, asked  Kukai to confer upon him Shingon precepts, and to grant him an initiatory unc 

tion (kanjo) normally reserved to practitioners of esoteric Buddhism. Kukai did  so in 822. This was the first, but not the last time* that an emperor requested  initiatory rites. As a matter of fact, such rituals became, during the medieval  period, a regular part of enthronement rites.  

In order to understand the conditions that guided the relations between power  and ritual during the Heian period and thereafter, it is necessary to emphasize  two issues. First is the way in which Japanese Buddhist ecclesiasts of the two  major lineages of Tendai and Shingon esotericism cultivated good relations with  the leaders of the Fujiwara house and the imperial family. From their inception  and for much of their history, both Tendai and Shingon were geared to the elite,  without whose political and economic support they might have faltered and dis appeared. The relationship that was to evolve between these Buddhisms and the  leading houses of Heian Japan was one of reciprocity: the aristocracy needed  legitimacy, as well as relief from what it thought were certain obscure causes of  disease and otherwordly causes of internecine and exterior unrest; on the other  hand, Buddhist schools needed economic and other forms of support for their  institutions and to uphold their own claims to legitimacy. Saicho (767-822) had  been successful in restoring a modicum of communication between Buddhist  institutions and the imperial state after the debacle that had led to the abandon ment of the Nara (Heijokyo) capital and the creation of the Kyoto (Heiankyo)  capital in 794. Kukai was instrumental in making esoteric Buddhism the main  intellectual and ritual operative of the elite. One important step in that direction  was his establishment of esoteric initiation and the taking of precepts as the late-

PRECEPT S FOR AN EMPERO R 147  

life counterpart of autochthonous rites of enthronement. Kukai established eso teric Buddhism at court by positing himself as the ritual guarantor of imperial  legitimacy, by making esotericism the practice of aristocrats during the last years  

of their life, and by assuming responsibility for funerary rites.  The second issue is the place of ritual in Heian culture. Ritual was obviously  more than rule-governed activity serving to bond sacerdotal and policy-making  functions, institutions, and people. Even though sacerdotal authority and policy making power were supposed to be merged in the imperial person, it seems that  there was generally, at the social level, a perceived opposition between purity and  power; and that ritual may have served either to annihilate or minimize the pol luting aspects of the use of power and violence, especially in the context of ter ritorial expansion and maintenance. This motif seems to undergird some of the  passages in the texts presented below. Of greater importance, however, is the fact  that Heian culture was marked by the development of a ritual economy of power,  by which the legitimacy of the rulers was grounded in ritual codes and laws  (elaborated in 859 in the Jogan-gishiki, and further developed in 967 in the Engi shiki), which were applicable to (Shinto) shrines in the entire country under im perial rule, and which stipulated what rituals should be performed where and  when, and at what price - a price to be exacted from local governments and the  general labor force. In the case of Buddhist temples, Shingon and Tendai both  developed large-scale rituals to be performed on the levels of the state, aristocratic  houses, and individuals. Heian Japan thus evolved into a highly ritualized state,  in which both shrines and temples played a sometimes complementary, some times competitive, role. In other words, ritual was considered a powerful activity  in both Shinto shrines and Buddhist temples, as well as in policy-making circles.  The overall institutional framework within which these rituals were performed  was named kenmitsu taisei (exoteric-esoteric regime) by the late Japanese historian  Kuroda Toshio; its goal would have been the establishment of the Heian period's  leading ideology of mutual support between Buddhist temples and Shinto shrines  on the one hand, and, on the other, the imperial power structure (obo-buppo)  through the maintenance of institutions and rituals for the protection of the im perial and aristocratic houses ruling the country (chingo-kokka). This arrangement  manifested itself materially through grants of landholdings to shrines and temples,  which the Buddhist temples and shrines associated with them used to establish  themselves as major economic and political powers. In this set of arrangements  and institutions, esoteric Buddhist rituals became dominant, and left such a deep  mark on Japanese culture during and long after the Heian period that to ignore  them would lead to gross distortions in our understanding of that culture as a  whole. Needless to say, the type of rationalization provided by Kukai in the text  below was responsible, in part, for the success of this feature of Japanese cultic  and political history.  

By Kukai's time, Buddhism had already become a tool of imperial ideology in  China and Korea, and it would not have been accepted by Japan's Heian court if  it did not provide, on the one hand, a comprehensive system for analyzing the148 ALLAN G. GRAPARD  

human condition and, on the other, a beneficial political arrangement between  the emerging imperial state and Buddhist institutions. For reasons yet to be de termined, Kukai felt a need to place Buddhist rather than Shinto shrines at the  service of interests of the imperial house and its surrounding aristocratic houses.  He also wished to convince his contemporaries that esotericism was a compre hensive world of symbols and an effective ritual system. There is no question that  the overwhelming concern of the early ninth-century courtiers was to establish  the supremacy of the imperial house, as seen in the establishment of Chinese law,  the definition and codification of autochthonous ritual, and general support for,  but control of, Buddhism. Kukai's thought and activities fit this concern in the  sense that he saw Buddhism as supportive of the imperial system in two ways.  First, he posited the emperor as a manifestation on earth of the cakravartin, the  universal monarch discussed in a number of Buddhist scriptures, apocryphal and  otherwise. Second, he arranged for Buddhist rituals of protection of the imperial  lineage to be performed in the imperial palace, and encouraged individual aris tocrats to have various Buddhist rituals performed for a vast array of reasons and  situations.  

One of the ways Kukai established Shingon esotericism in ninth-century Japan  was through an emphasis on lineage. This satisfied a number of parties: the state  with its intrinsic interest in state-sponsored historical records and genealogies,  and several Buddhist schools' interest in grounding the legitimacy of new state 

ments in (mainly fictitious) genealogies. The emphasis on lineage thus worked to  locate new schools in the overall understanding of varied and often contradictory  Buddhist doctrines and practices, and formally to establish normative access to  new knowledge and ritual, as well as to legitimate secret transmissions from mas 

ter to disciple. Kukai wrote several documents on his lineage, and mentions it  and his place therein in the document translated below; by initiating a retired  emperor, Kukai co-opted him, so to speak, and thereby attempted to assert the  supremacy of esoteric Buddhist ritual. Secrecy and lineage became integral parts  of the transmission of knowledge and practice in relation to power, and this  system remained in place, both in and out of Buddhist esoteric circles, for better  or worse, for nearly one thousand years.  

One of Kukai's central concerns is visible in his lifelong efforts to position  Shingon at the apex of the various Buddhisms in existence in his time, both for  the elite and other members of the society in which he lived. Nowhere is this  more evident than in his most important and lengthiest work (still untranslated),  the Ten Stages of the Mind (jujushinron), in which he applies the doctrine of ex 

pedient devices or skillful means (upaya in Sanskrit, hoben in Japanese) to suggest  that Shingon esotericism was at once the matrix and culmination of all Buddhist  schools, as well as of Confucianism and Taoism. In this and other works, includ ing the document translated below, Kukai ranks eight schools of thought and  practice in terms of two major analytical concerns: the depth and complexity of  their philosophical achievements, and their appropriateness to radically different  types of human psychological and intellectual tendencies and abilities. It may be 

PRECEPTS FOR AN EMPEROR 149  

argued that this double analytical concern dominates all of Kukai's works; it is  the central feature of his earliest work comparing Confucianism, Taoism, and  Buddhism, as well as of his latest works.  

In the document discussed here, this analytical concern manifests itself as a  discussion of the relative merits and applicabilities of the "eight schools of Bud dhism," which in Japan were more or less institutionalized by 822. These are the  Ritsu, Kusha, Jojitsu, Hosso, Sanron, Tendai, Kegon, and Shingon schools. Ritsu  (vinaya in Sanskrit) refers to the disciplinary rules transmitted to Japan by the  Chinese monk Ganjin (Jianzhen, 688-763); Kusha (abhidharmakosa-sastra in San skrit), refers to the abhidharma set of philosophical, cosmological, and cosmo graphic considerations set forth in the document of the same name; Jojitsu (sat yasiddhi in Sanskrit), refers to a commentary that went largely ignored in Japan.  Hosso refers to the so-called "idealistic" school of Yogacara Buddhism that orig inated with Asahga and Maitreya in India; in Japan, this school was based in the  Kofukuji temple, the private institution of the Fujiwara aristocratic house. Sanron  refers to the three treatises said to have been authored by Nagarjuna, the central  figure of the philosophy of emptiness that in fact forms the core of the various  schools of Mahayana Buddhism. Tendai is the Chinese school based on the Lotus  Sutra and its Chinese commentaries, imported by Saicho (767-822). Tendai was  so influenced by Shingon, however, that one came to speak of two esotericisms,  the Shingon-based Tomitsu, and the Tendai-based Taimitsu; these two sets of  esoteric thought and practice were closely related. Finally, Shingon ("spell," man tra in Sanskrit) is the name given to the school established by Kukai in the early  ninth century.  

Although he made it clear that he saw fundamental value in each of the schools,  and different sets of people for whom these schools' teachings and practices would  be appropriate, Kukai insisted that Shingon was both superior to and inclusive  of all of them. Kukai was not, of course, the originator of this type of ranking and  competitive assessment of Buddhist schools; known in China as pan-jiao ("doc 

trinal critique"), this practice had its origins in India. It subsequently evolved in  China, within complex social and political circumstances, in order to demonstrate  which school of Buddhism the emperor was to sponsor as the main guarantor of  his legitimacy. Kukai simply imported and refined the technique, using it to fur 

ther his desire to convince his audience of the validity of his argument, that is,  that Shingon was to be the principal philosophical and ritual arm of the imperial  state. Although it is clear that esotericism prevailed, Shingon alone did not. Im portant questions with regard to this comment cannot be answered without fur ther examination of the subtle and important differences between Taimitsu and  Tomitsu esotericisms, and of their sponsorship by competing political factions.  Japanese scholarship is, in this respect, seriously lacking, in that it is usually  

dominated by modern but thoroughly outdated sectarian concerns.  Kukai was well aware of the traditional distinction between the three parts of  the Buddhist canon (the so-called Triple Basket consisting of teachings, discipli nary rules, and commentaries). He insisted, however, on a division into five parts 

150 ALLAN G. GRAPARD  

that resulted in the separate treatment of a corpus of treatises on wisdom (prajna)  and of esoteric treatises and formulas (dharanls). He thus speaks in the document  translated below not of a triple basket but rather of a quintuple system (the "five  storehouses" or "containers"), in a move to assert the autonomy and legitimacy  of esoteric teachings and practices.  

Esoteric Buddhist traditions emphasize the transmission of doctrines through  series of secret initiatory unctions (kanjos), but accord greater importance to ritual  practices considered to be the main vehicle for attainment of buddhahood in this  body, that is, in the present lifetime. The Triple Mystery of body, speech, and  mind is a set of technologies of the self ("the great self of no-self," muga no daiga),  which consists of physical practices of control of the body, practices related to  speech (the utterance of mantras and dharanis, and their corresponding medita tions), and highly ritualized meditative practices based on a number of esoteric  documents.  

These practices are subsumed under the umbrella of the "four types of man dala," graphic representations of the parallel structures of the cosmos (the body  of the buddha Mahavairocana) and of sentient beings. The four types of mandalas  are dai mandara, or painted mandalas that represent deities; sammaya mandara,  or convention mandalas, in which the various deities are represented by various  ritual emblems; ho mandara, in which the deities are represented by their seed  syllables (bijas) and corresponding sounds; and katsuma mandara, in which the  deities are represented separately in various forms and by symbols identifying  their varied functions and virtues. Mandala-based ritualization of the body,  speech, and mind were thus held to transform common passions into their  corresponding wisdoms, leading from the illusory notion that commoners and  buddhas are different to the realization that people ensconced in passions are  not separate from the Buddha. This highly organized and structured realm of  practices that engaged the entirety of being obviously drew imperial and aristo 

cratic support.  

The text translated below comprises four separate parts. The first part offers  definitions of Shingon's main characteristics: that the Body of Essence of the  Buddha does preach; that the doctrine of the Three Mysteries is central; and that  Shingon has its own precepts, which the retired emperor is about to take upon  himself. This is followed by a description of the lineage of transmission of these  teachings, that of the so-called Eight Patriarchs, to legitimate Kukai's own posi 

tion. In the second part, Kukai outlines the differences between exoteric and  esoteric Buddhisms, which differences account for the different types of precepts.  He then discusses the eight schools of Buddhism in existence at the time, and  stipulates that the precepts to be taken at this point are the samaya ("pledge")  precepts particular to Shingon. Kukai then discusses the various meanings of the  Sanskrit term samaya, which is variously interpreted as equality, original vow,  removal of obstacles, and attainment of awakening. The third part outlines the  categories of canonical texts, classified by Kukai as the "five storehouses": sutra  (scriptures), vinaya (codes of conduct), abhidharma (philosophical treatises), pra-

PRECEPTS FOR AN EMPEROR 151  

jna (wisdom literature), and dharanis (esoteric formulas, bearers of wisdom). Ku kai then discusses the eight schools of Buddhism current at his time, enumerating  the different types of texts that form their basis, thereby characterizing the schools'  tendencies and audiences. He uses this discussion to clarify the position of Shin gon precepts within the overall framework of Buddhist teachings and practices.  Finally, in the fourth part, Kukai analyzes the Shingon precepts and emphasizes  that practitioners of esoteric Buddhism are to develop four types of mental  achievement: the confident mind, the great compassionate mind, the critical  mind, and the awakened mind. Kukai then defines the term "precept," discussing  two of its features: vinaya (discipline) as control, and sila (morality) as calm.  

The source for this reading is Heizei tenno kanjobun (Text for the Initiatory Unction  of Emperor Heizei), dated 822 C.E. I have used the version contained in Katsumata  Shunkyo, Kobo Daishi Zenshu (Tokyo: Sankibo, 1970), vol. 2, pp. 117-45.  

Further Reading  

On the ritual economy of Heian Japan, see Allan Grapard, "Aspects economiques  du rituel," Cipango 6 (Autumn 1997) (Paris: Publications Langues'O, 1997), pp.  111-50; Grapard, "Religious Practices in the Heian Period," in The Cambridge  History of Japan, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), pp. 517- 75; and Grapard, "The Ritual Economy of Power," in J. Breen and M. Teeuwen,  eds., Ways of the Kami (London: Curzon Press, 2000). On the difficulty of trans 

lating the term samaya, see David Snellgrove, Indo-Tibetan Buddhism (Boston:  Shambala, 1987), vol. 1, pp. 165-66.  

Precepts for an Emperor  

1.  

Lest one be endowed with the legs of the asura, the eight-yojana-deep [seventy one-mile-deep] oceans shall remain unfathomable; and lest one be endowed  with the wings of the phoenix, the wind-blown summits of the nine mountains  shall remain forbidden to sight. As the wide and solid earth will be reduced to  cinders, so the mighty billows of black clouds will be dispersed by raging gales.  Only upon the appearance of a great dragon does the wish-fulfilling gem pro duce its treasures. Should it be taken improperly, even the miracle drug [con cocted by] the Universal Sovereign will turn to poison. What then should be  said of the rare possibility of hearing the treasury of the Mysteries of Shingon,  since they transcend the three categories of self-substance, self-aspect, and self function? And what of the difficulty inherent in gaining the Adamantine Bud dha precepts that transcend the ten stages leading to bodhisattvahood? 

152 ALLAN G. GRAPARD  

Who but members of the lineage of the Universal Monarch and the great  bodhisattvas could unite the five wisdoms in their heart-minds and realize the  Triple Mystery in their bodies? Under the insightful gaze of a doctor, a hundred  poisons are as good as medicine, just as in the light of the Buddha's wisdom  all living beings appear as buddhas. The corporeal nature of all living beings  and the realm of essence of all buddhas are originally of a single flavor and are  not distinct. However, those living beings who do not awaken [to this truth]  are subjected to pain during their long slumber, while the buddhas are fully  awakened and reside permanently in a state of bliss.  

In disclosing the doctrine of Shingon, the Buddha showed the right way to  those who are lost, so that all living beings might immediately awaken to their  Buddha mind and swiftly return to the original source. That is why it is said  in the Kongochogyo [Vajrasekharasutra, Taisho 865]:  

The storehouse of dharanis and mantras contains the ultimate secret teach ings of the Tathagata [a title for the Buddha]; it contains the doctrine of self awakening, its attendant knowledge, and the practice leading to its dem onstration. Furthermore, it is the samadhi ("concentration") gate through  

which all bodhisattvas must pass in order to receive the incommensurable  meanings of the pure precepts of the Buddha; it is the location at which,  ascending the platform of the ocean-assembly of all tathagatas, they will  receive the various degrees of initiation and, transcending the triple world,  will acquire the teachings of the Buddha. When all causes are collected, they  will immediately bring together wisdom and broad virtues and, reaching the  "awakening without superior," attain the point of no possible return. Having  left all the gods and demons behind, with absolutely every passion, fault,  and obstruction dissolved in each moment of thought, they will come to  realize the quadruple body of the essence of the Buddha. This is known as  the Buddha of Self-Nature."  

. . . It is also said in the Rokuharamitsukyo [Taisho 261], "All the teachings  of the Buddha are contained in the five storehouses." Of these five store houses, the sutra-pitaka is tantamount to milk, while the dharani-pitaka is  tantamount to ghee. Furthermore, it is said in the Kongochogyo, "The Bud dha's metamorphic body achieved awakening in the kingdom of Magadha  in the land of Jambu-dvipa and expounded the teachings of the Three Ve hicles to the various bodhisattvas, sravakas ["auditors," persons who attain  emancipation while listening to the Buddha], pratyeka-buddhas ["lonebud dhas,"who attain emancipation as a result of causal factors], and common  folk he met. He would now employ teachings conforming to their minds,  and then teachings conforming to his own. Those who, according to their  capacities and in congruence with the expedient devices, put his teachings  into practice - they shall gain the fruit available to men and gods. Or, ob taining the fruit of liberation of the Three Vehicles, they will - either by  advancing or retreating - obtain the realization of buddhahood upon com-

PRECEPTS FOR AN EMPEROR 153  

pletion of ascetic practices over three incommensurable periods of time, at  the level of "awakening without superior." Born in a royal palace, extinct in  the sala grove, the Buddha bequeathed his body as relics. Those who build  stupas and revere him will gain the wonderful reward available to men and  gods, and shall initiate the course whose end is nirvana.  

The above segment interprets the sermon of the Buddha in his body of bliss,  residing in the heavenly palace of akanistha, in the fourth ecstasy at the summit  of the realm of form. The proof thereof is visible in all bodhisattvas who have  completed the ten stages and in all tathagatas who fill the all-pervasive realm  of essence. That Buddha jolts his own heart-mind into awakening; therefore,  this [interpretation] is different from the demonstration of the immediate  "awakening without superior."  

The Buddha of Essential Nature thereupon released, through emanation  from his heart-mind, an incommensurable number of bodhisattvas, all having  one and the same diamond nature. Encountering that cosmic buddha, they  acquired the various degrees of initiation. Expounding the doctrine of the Tri 

ple Mystery one by one, these bodhisattvas approached Mahavairocana and all  the tathagatas, and requested the teaching of empowerment. The venerable  Mahavairocana then declared,  

As members of the Supreme Vehicle, in the future and for an incommen surable number of [time-]worlds, you shall be enabled to achieve both mun dane and extra-mundane completions in the course of your lifetime.  

Having thus received the Tathagata's behest, all those bodhisattvas revered  the buddha's feet. Circumambulating Mahavairocana, they then withdrew, each  to his original quarters in the cosmos where, becoming five-storied stupas,  these bodhisattvas held forth the banner of the teaching. And thus, whether  by vision, by audition, or by penetration of the five circular mandala platforms,  they became proficient in extracting the karmic obstructions of sentient beings  who wander about in the wheel of transmigration. Seated in the midst of five  lunar circles, they moved from one buddha to the next, revered him and re 

ceived his teaching, and thereby gained the "awakening without superior" and  produced the confirmation of "no more rebirth." This is similar to the diamond  that cannot be crushed. Such is the Assembly of Mahavairocana. Thus did they  become the symbolic body of Mahavairocana. Each bodhisattva, each diamond,  residing in its own deliverance, residing in its own concentration - and all  residing in the power of the vow of great compassion - thus assists all sentient  beings, far and near. Either by vision or by audition, all fully confirm their  concentration and realize the immediate completion of all virtues and wisdoms.  

This Mahavairocana tathagata, in his physical body in the realm of essence  as well as in his quadruple body of essence in which the five wisdoms are  realized, resides together with an assembly of vajrasattvas [thunderbolt-beings]  and buddhas as numerous as specks of dust, either within the palace of the 

154 ALLAN G. GRAPARD  

realm of essence or in the heart-mind palace of [the bodhisattva] Samanta bhadra, and unceasingly expounds the secret storehouse of Shingon, the  Unique Diamond Vehicle.  

A long time ago, following the extinction of the tathagata Sakyamuni, there  lived a great master named Nagarjuna; he was initiated by [the Master of Mys teries] Vajrasattva and thus gained access to the teaching of mysteries. His  disciple Nagabodhi received these teachings from Nagarjuna. Nagabodhi lived  for over nine hundred years and had more than thirty faces. He resided in  southern India, where he spread those teachings. His disciple Vajrabodhi trans mitted those teachings to China when he arrived there in 720. His superior  disciple Amoghavajra went to India between 742 and 746 to study under Va jrabodhi, gained [access to] the Kongochogyo and the Dainichikyo [scriptures]  as well as to the five kinds of mandalas [forming the Diamond mandala], and  then returned to China. Three emperors were initiated by him: they took the  Buddha precepts and entered the practice of the Triple Mystery. Among Amo ghavajra's disciples, eight received his dharma seal [confirmation]. One of those  was Huiguo of the Qinglong-si [temple], versed in the teachings of the two  [mandala] realms and in no way inferior to his master's style. He bestowed the  precepts to Emperor Dezong and to an imperial prince, and granted them the  initiation. Huiguo was the seventh patriarch, the acarya [supreme master] of  the transmission of the doctrine. As for my humble self, I was fortunate enough  to live in a peaceful world and to have developed a thirst for the Buddhist  teachings. Living under the august protection of this sacred court and resting  upon the compassionate power of the great master, on the thirteenth day of  the sixth month of the year 805, I took the Buddha's samaya precepts in the  Initiation Hall of the Eastern Hall of the Qinglong-si [temple] in Chang-an,  and was granted initiation into the five parts of the mandala. [Subsequently]  undertaking a lengthy voyage, I forgot the brevity of existence and, throwing  my life, precarious as a bubble, onto the seething waves of the ocean, I brought  the two mandalas and more than one hundred scrolls of scriptures of the  Diamond Vehicle back to Japan, hoping thereby to repay my debt to the court.  Favored by chance again, I was greeted by this imperial court, a manifestation  on earth of the buddhas and a court that follows the enlightened policy of a  cakravartin. Thus, in the year 806 I was able to present the court with the two  mandalas and a number of scriptures. Due to my own lack of a sense of urgency,  however, seventeen years have already elapsed since that time. However,  Heaven sometimes grants human desires, and due to a favorable convergence  of circumstances I now face the dragon-face of the emperor and thus realize  my humble wish. Simultaneously feeling exultation and sadness, it is is difficult  to remain poised.  

When reflecting upon the topic, it is clear that the present emperor has  reached such an exalted status as a result of karmic conditions that developed  long ago, and because the consequence of those conditions came to fruition in  the lifetime preceding the present one. It is because compassion has not ex-

PRECEPTS FOR AN EMPEROR 155  

hausted itself and because all living beings are here that he now manifests  himself in this domain and exerts himself for the salvation of all. At the present  juncture this [retired] emperor has withdrawn from public affairs and has set  his mind to wu-wei [non-interference]. In order to protect the stronghold of  the Buddhist teachings (dharma) he now temporarily displays his capacity for  investiture in the Buddhist code (dharma) and, out of compassion for all living  beings, deigns to listen to a sermon pronounced by an unworthy commoner.  Is it not cause for joy that today the four classes of ecclesiasts, as well as the  great and small of this world, have come to see the emperor and his son the  imperial prince take these Buddha precepts so that they may quickly reach the  stage of the buddha?  

I thus humbly formulate the following vow. . . .  

II.  

This heart-mind of ours is greater than the Great Void; the buddha that is  inside this self of ours transcends the realm of essence. Even the metaphor of  the number of specks of dust in the universe is ill-suited to describe the number  of temples; even the metaphor of the brilliance of the sun and moon is inade 

quate to express the radiance of the cintamani [wish-fulfilling] gem. There is  no need for practice, since the pure awakened one is present within from time  immemorial; there is no need for meditation, since the essence (sattva) of  innate awakening is already naturally obtained.  

The godhead endowed with the five wisdoms stands atop our neck, and the  four types of mandalas are comprised in our four limbs. The principle of utter  suchness and the wisdom of absolute emptiness cannot be separated from one's  body, in the same way that if one were to cut its feet off, one could not advance,  or if one were to cut its hands off, one could not grasp anything. Ah, wonderful  indeed are the mandalas, wonderful indeed this Triple Mystery of ours! But it  is precisely there that violent winds surge and stir immense waves on the ocean;  it is there that dark clouds evolve and kick stunning dust storms into being.  The tigers of empty dreams crowd every corner of the triple world, while the  flowers of illusion shed their radiance in the homes of the four classes of beings.  Foolish attachments to a self conceived either as a source or as an agent of  being push their roots ever deeper into the heart, while the illusions of mate rialism and being further obscure our consciousness with their thickening fo 

liage. Three types of foolish attachments cast their shadow to hide the light of  the great sun, while the illusory thought of a true being as permanent, blissful,  pure, and autonomous cloud the moon of awakening. Deeply ensconced in a  sleep from which we fail to awaken, we dwell in the raging fires of the triple  world. As a consequence, the twelve causal factors never cease to spur the  wheel of transmigration, while the five aggregates (skandhas) and their ensuing  eight types of frustrations never tire of their illusionist tricks. Father and son  go on engendering father and son, and body-minds go on reproducing body-

156 ALLAN G. GRAPARD  

minds that appear and disappear. The suffering of birth, the suffering of death,  the pain of aging, the pain of disease, the frustation of poverty, the frustration  of wealth - these six types of suffering constantly threaten us, while hell awaits  us all. When even the gods know no peace, what might be said of the human  condition?  

It is because the compassionate father of great awakening has clearly appre ciated this situation that he dispenses antidotes for the types of disease we  suffer from, that he devises method upon method to show how lost we are and  to show us the way back to the original source. Just as there are distinctions  between weak and strong poisons, so there are distinctions between shallow  and deep doctrinal medicines. The vehicles, be they double or triple, are offered  according to situation, just as the rafts of exoteric and esoteric doctrines are  offered according to merit. But they are offered. Such is the reason for which  the types of precepts vary structurally, in accordance with types of doctrine.  As Nagarjuna stated, "There are five types of precepts: men-and-god precepts,  Sravaka precepts, pratyeka-buddha precepts, bodhisattva precepts, and samaya  precepts."  

The precepts taken today are those of this final fifth category. The [conven tional] ten good precepts are similar in the five classes outlined above; they  merely vary in depth, according to the breadth of the issues. Furthermore, just  as there are four and ten types of distinctions in the sravaka and bodhisattva  precepts, there are distinctions in the samaya precepts [taken today]. However,  their meaning varies even though their name remains the same. Thus, although  the four types of precepts offered in the sravaka and bodhisattva categories are  here as usual, they have a different meaning in the present case, to which we  will return. [However,] let it be clear that it is not only the precepts but also  the corresponding wisdoms that change accordingly.  

If one is speaking of vehicles, there are five. If one is speaking of schools,  eight offer different directions. These are: Ritsu, Kusha, Jojitsu, Hosso, Sanron,  Tendai, Kegon, and Shingon. The Ritsu school prevents harm from the seven  factors that issue from body and speech: its four introspections lead toward  the ultimate goal in which the body is reduced to ashes and knowledge extin 

guished. The Kusha school discusses the concept of the true existence of the  three temporal worlds, whereas the Jojitsu school teaches the emptiness of all  phenomena (dharmas). Their aim is to realize arhatship, the goal of the Lesser  Vehicle. The three preceding schools form the Lesser Vehicle. The Hosso  school teaches the concepts of the eight forms of consciousness and the triple  nature, proposes in a wonderful fashion the principle of consciousness-only  without objects of perception, and broadly develops a universal doctrine of  causation. It establishes a vertical hierarchy of fifty-two degrees, and expounds  the view of three incommensurable units of time. The Hosso [teachings] thus  put an end to those who are foolish enough to dispense with the law of cause  and effect, and to those ignorant people who are led astray by the objects of  perception outside the mind: they are a balm that soothes all living beings that 

PRECEPT S FOR A N EMPERO R 157  

are bursting with arrogance, and are [collectively] known as the doctrine of  the samadhi of great compassion of [the bodhisattva] Maitreya. The Sanron  school excels at teaching the principle of the eight negations, and in a won derful fashion lays all false opinions and views to rest. It affords insight into  what it calls the unique truth of nonproduction, whence it develops the concept  of middle path of absolute and relative truths. This doctrine may be compared  to a violent fire that consumes the three poisons and the four demons, or to a  raging wind that disperses the clouds of false reasoning. It ranks as a superior  medicine capable of sweeping away all attachments of body and mind, and of  loosing all inner and outer obstacles. It is also known as the practice of the  Mother of the Buddha of Wisdom, or of the samadhi [concentration] of [the  bodhisattva] Maitreya. The Tendai school offers the teachings of the Unique  Vehicle and of the Triple Introspection, brings forth the concepts of four teach 

ings and of undivided suchness, and reaches its wonderful culmination in the  concepts of a single thought-moment, triple truth, and mediate idealism. It is  grounded in the foundations of the Lotus Sutra and of the Treatise of Middle  Introspection, and is centered on Mount Tiantai [in China, and Mount Hiei in  Japan]. It is known as the practice of Avalokitesvara, the bodhisattva of great  compassion. The Kegon school is wonderfully apt at expounding nonobstruc 

tion in the Realm of Essence, and discusses at length the concept of harmo nization of fact and principle. It thus annihilates the disease in which phenom ena (dharmas) are conceived of as having an unchanging nature, and prescribes  the medicine of nondistinction between mind and Buddha. Should one attempt  to define its practice, it might be called the practice of the samadhi in the realm  of essence of [the bodhisattva] Samantabhadra. The various teachings of the  schools outlined above are as so many decrees from the Law (dharma) King,  issuing from his governmental offices. They expand in depth and breadth, and  display great limpidity and radiant effulgence; they are miraculous remedies  applied in accordance with the occasion by Sakyamuni, the emperor of the  Buddhist law (dharma) and king of medicine.  

The code (dharma) that is about to be sworn to at the present moment is  the Secret Mandala performed by the tathagata Mahavairocana, who resides in  the mind palace of the adamantine realm of essence, and who manifests himself  as the five tathagatas, who represent as many wisdoms in their quadruple body 

form, together with their many inner cohorts. The tathagata Mahavairocana's  attributes are virtues as numerous as the grains of sand in the desert, of which  none whatsoever is lacking. That is why he also receives the name of mandala,  which has the following meanings: incomparable flavor, unsurpassable savor,  and perfect circularity. Those who are to enter this vehicle must first abide by  these precepts. These are named samaya, and the teaching is called mantra  [Shingon]. The term samaya is Sanskrit; in its Chinese rendition it means  original vow, equality, acquisition.  

The term equality refers to the triple equality, since it indicates the equality  of the triple mystery of body, speech, and mind. It is also known as the Three158 ALLAN G. GRAPAR D  

Parts, which refer to the Buddha, the Lotus, and Diamond. All buddhas of these  Three Parts possess the four types of mandala and the quadruple body of es sence. All these divine entities are equal to one other and there is no distinction  of increase or decrease, of superiority or inferiority between them. That is why  one uses the term equality. These divine entities exist in an incommensurable  number; and this incommensurable number of buddhas all exist within a single  being. This doctrine holds that one must fully contemplate all these buddhas  within [oneself], and then go on to contemplate the buddhas within other  living beings. It is in order to contemplate the buddhas within himself that the  Buddha exerts himself in the contemplation of the Triple Mystery, and it is for  the sake of other living beings that he practices according to that vow.  

The term "original vow" indicates the lack of distinction that the Buddha  maintains between himself and all other living beings. It is for this reason that  he formulated this great vow, and that he practices compassion accordingly.  This vow consists of the Four Incommensurables and the Four Acquisitions.  It is of benefit to all living beings and saves all forms of life. This makes him  the father of all living beings, something to keep in mind.  

The term "acquisition" means entrance into the self and entrance of the self.  The buddhas of oneself, numerous as specks of dust, easily enter the self of  others; while the buddhas of another self, numerous as specks of dust, easily  penetrate one's own mind's buddhas, and thus in complete reciprocity carry  out the functions of acquirable and acquired, of potential and realization. If  one meditates on this principle, one acquires the universal mind.  

Furthermore, one may propose an interpretation based on linguistic  grounds. The term sa-ma-ya refers to the Three Treasures, namely, to the Three  Parts. The term sa refers to the various doctrinal truths. Truth is something  that can be gained only through meditation in the practice of the samadhi of  great compassion of [the bodhisattva] Avalokitesvara. The term ma refers to  that which the self cannot gain, namely, emptiness. Emptiness is another name  for the tathagata who does not promote false reasoning - [that is, the bodhi 

sattva] Maitreya - and it is known as the practice of great wisdom. The term  ya means vehicle, but refers to a vehicle that cannot be boarded. The vajrasattva  of primordial being is without beginning or end, and knows neither production  nor destruction; its nature is constant and equal to the void. Since it neither  comes nor goes, who could board it? Its course has already been run. This is  why it is termed "unboardable vehicle." The three virtues delineated above form  the attributes of the tathagata Mahavairocana. Mahavairocana's physical attrib utes are all subsumed under these three syllables, and it is in order to reveal  this that the term sa-ma-ya is used. Should one grasp this concept and chant  these three syllables, one will acquire absolutely all of the tathagata Mahavai 

rocana's virtues and wisdoms. Expand on these concepts. I have been unable  to offer them in a compact form. Of all the doctrines of the Greater Vehicle, this  doctrine is the most venerable and the most noble. That is why it is stated in 

PRECEPT S FOR A N EMPERO R 15 9  

the Rokuharamitsugyo and in the Shugokokkyo: . . . [these two quotations are  missing in the original].  

III.  

However imperceptible the dragon's breath may be, it can instantly stir the  clouds of the entire universe into motion; and small though the eye may be, it  can at once perceive immense depths and horizons. And what can one say of  the asura's legs, able to fathom the depths of the ocean; or of the wings of the  phoenix, able to carry it to immense heights? But these are still unconsequential  metaphors: when it comes to evaluating the bodhisattvas' production of the  mind of awakening, or the mental preparation of the vajrasattva whose heart mind comprises the entire realm of essence and who treats all living beings as  if they were the object of his fourfold duty, what can one say? They extract  suffering from all living beings and replace it with pleasure. The extraction of  suffering cannot be effected without correct practice, and it is impossible to  grant pleasure without correct teaching (dharma). The terms "correct practice"  and "correct teaching" cover practices and doctrines that are manifold by virtue  of the multiplicity of occasions [for which they are appropriate]. The means  to deal with situations and occasions vary accordingly. There are five major  means to grasp the end and return to the origin. As is stated in the Daijorishu rokuharamitsugyo, immeasurable are the treasures of doctrine the tathagatas  have at their disposal:  

Five broad distinctions can be made. First comes the sutra-pitaka; second,  the vinaya-pitaka; third, the abhidharma-pitaka; fourth, the prajna-pitaka;  and fifth, the dharani-pitaka. The sutra-pitaka is intended for those who  enjoy ecstatic introspection in the forests. The vinaya-pitaka is for those who  enjoy living in cities and monasteries, who are interested in proper form,  who wish to harmonize themselves and hold on to the correct teaching. The  abhidharma-pitaka is for those who do not enjoy the above two and prefer  to polish the aspect of nature, or for those who enjoy the examination of  deep principles. The prajna-pitaka is either for those who, not enjoying any  of the above, distance themselves from attachments and false reasoning, and  who, swiftly reaching a state of nondiscrimination, enjoy abiding in calm ness; or it is for those who, not enjoying any of the above, quickly cut off  all passions and enjoy exiting from the round of transmigration and who  thereby attest to the body of essence. Finally, the dharani-pitaka has been  devised by the Buddha for those who break the quadruple injunction for  monks; the octuple injunction for nuns; for those who perpetrate the five  major sins; for those who ridicule the Vaipulya sutra corpus, and for icchan tikas ["willful ones" who never attain awakening] and other similar beings.  The five storehouses [of doctrine] as described above are classified along the 

160 ALLAN G. GRAPARD  

five stages of production of ghee: the sutras are like milk, . . . and the dhar anls are like ghee. Ghee is the most wonderful and delicate of all flavors and  is able to cure disease in the same way as the dharanis. Dharanis enable one  to destroy all obstructions to the cutting off all passions, to the swift reali zation of happiness and wisdom, and the witnessing of the immediate real ization of the body of essence.  

Thus five categories are established to classify the teachings expounded by  the Buddha. As for those teachings that are expounded by bodhisattvas and  men, there are eight schools: first, Ritsu; second, Kusha; third, Jojitsu; fourth,  Hosso; fifth, Sanron; sixth, Tendai; seventh, Kegon; and eighth, Shingon. The  first three make up the Lesser Vehicle; the next four constitute the Greater  Vehicle. The last one is called the Diamond Vehicle of Mysteries. . . . Thus the  first seven schools constitute exoteric Buddhism. It is possible to suggest that  their contents range from shallow to deep; nevertheless, these are teachings of  various manifestations of the Buddha, medicines granted according to situa tions. Thus the great king of medicine dispenses his cures according to the  type of disease and in virtue of the type of recipient. That is why the precepts  vary in accordance with these categories of teachings. And this is why Nagar juna stated, "There are five types of precepts: men and gods precepts, sravaka  precepts, pratyeka-buddha precepts, bodhisattva precepts, and samaya pre 

cepts." The precepts to be taken presently are the samaya precepts.  

IV.  

The twelve hundred herbal cures and the seventy-two kinds of medicinal prep arations have been devised out of compassion for the ills of the body, just as  the wonderful teachings (dharmas) in twelve parts and eighty-four thousand  stanzas were expounded to relieve kindly the ills of the mind. Since the ills of  the body are many, there is no panacea; and since the affections of the mind  are manifold, the teachings found in scriptures are not universal. Thus the  World-honoured One dispenses various drugs to cure equally varied kinds of  afflictions. The five virtues of Confucianism and the five prohibitions form the  basic medicine geared to the indigent child; the six practices and four intro 

spections are best for that indigent one. The 250 precepts, the four introspec tions and the eight powerful concentrations, the twelve causal factors and the  twelve practical vows (dhutas) allow one to take evasive action from the human  self and to affirm concentration {sanmai) - to keep the Dharma to oneself, and  thereby attain nirvana. These are soothing teachings for the sravakas, and a  remedy for the pratyeka buddhas. Beyond these, the causation of compassion,  the introspection of consciousness to fight illusions, the practice of the six  perfections, and the application of the four means of conversion enable one to  accumulate such deeds for three incommensurable periods of time and thereby  gain the fruit of the four wisdoms: such are the medicines of the Great Vehicle. 

PRECEPT S FOR A N EMPERO R 16 1  

Yet beyond gaining emancipation through rejection of the no-self, gaining  insight into the unborn and awakening to the essence of mind - activities such  as these enable one to wield the eight negations and cut through the eight  errors, whereas rejecting the five attachments empowers one to expunge the  five great prejudices. The four types of language thus lead beyond language  and enable one to penetrate the realm of noninterference, while the nine types  of perception are laid to rest: these are wonderful techniques that enable one  to awaken to the unborn character of the mind. Or, contemplating one's own  heart-mind in the middle of a lotus blossom, one reaches the point of unity  between wisdom and the object of the senses. The three truths are harmonized  and thereby shed light on the six types of immediacy; these are like acupunc ture and cauterization, and lead to the unique heart of the way of truth. What  then is to be said of the relationship between the realm of essence and Indra's  net? One who contemplates one's heart-mind's buddhas, and realizes that gold  and the lion are not separate and that waves and wetness are one, thereby  delineates the intricate patterns of the doctrine of the six aspects and ten mys teries. One then perceives the distinctions between the five teachings and the  four vehicles, realizes at once the correct awakening, and confirms the buddha  fruit at the end of three lifetimes. That is, namely, the buddha fruit of the heart mind of ultimate no-self-nature. All these wonderful doctrines cure the various  affections of the mind in an undescribable manner. Such is the nectar ex 

pounded by the manifestations of the Buddha for the sake of others.  

The samaya Buddha precepts to be granted presently are those of the Shingon  mandala teachings expounded by the body of essence of self-nature of Maha vairocana. Should there be any good man or woman, monk or nun, or men or  women of pure trust who should wish to board this vehicle and practice ac cordingly, they should first produce four types of mind. The first is the con fident mind, second the great compassionate mind, third the critical mind, and  fourth the awakened mind.  

First, the confident mind is produced so that one may be empowered to  maintain strong resolve without faltering. There are ten meanings to the term  "confidence": purity, so as to purify and render the mind clear and bright;  resolve, in order to fortify the nature of the mind; joy, in order to cut short all  frustrations; lack of disdain, so that negligence might be abandoned; equanim 

ity, in order to hold the same attitude in all situations; respect, in order that  the venerable ones not be the object of spite; acquiescence, in order that one  not react aggressively to words or actions; praise, in order that all actions be  the object thereof; indestructibility, in order that the mind may remain set; and  love, in order that the great compassionate mind may appear.  

This great compassionate mind is also called the mind of the vow to practice.  The so-called external ways and Two Vehicles do not give rise to it; however,  bodhisattvas do produce it in such manner that when they look at all beings  without exception in the realm of essence, they think that they are in fact  looking upon themselves. The mindset of a good person puts others before 

162 ALLAN G. GRAPARD  

oneself, and puts oneself after all others. Elsewhere, when looking at the three  periods of time, all a compassionate mind sees are the four debts of gratitude,  whose objects have fallen prey to the three evil destinations and thereby end lessly suffer. However, a good person regards all and anyone as his father, or  regards himself as their disciple. Who therefore is in need of salvation but  oneself? That is why one must produce the great compassionate mind. Great  compassion is good at dispensing cures, whereas great wisdom is good at re moving pain. . . . Though there are ten thousand distinctions in doctrines and  

medicines, their basis is formed by the eight vehicles described above.  As already stated, depth of treatment and speed of recovery vary with the  types of afflictions and situations; it is in order to be able to decide which  among many teachings is correct that one must develop the third mind, the  critical mind. This is also called the mind of deep wisdom. How does one reach  a judgment? It is like a superior man who, wishing to return to the home of  his heart-mind through the practice of the Dharma, first requires a choice as  to what kind of vehicle he will use. Should he desire to come to a decision  concerning the superiority of certain modes of transportation, he should not  rely upon the knowledge of the common man, of the Two Vehicles, or even of  the bodhisattvas of the ten stages. He should rely solely upon the teachings of  the Tathagata.  

The Tathagata has clearly expounded those differences. One should therefore  rely on his predictions and knowledge in order to reach a judgment. Com moners are engaged in producing a karma based on the ten defilements; they  are enmired in the three poisons and the five types of desires and, what is more,  ignore that they will be subjected to the sufferings of hell. This is why a Shingon  man of knowledge does not become attached to pleasures. As far as the doctrine  of the human vehicle for commoners is concerned - although it may be said  that it instills belief in the law of cause and effect, and that it entices one to  practice the five constancies and the five precepts - it must be emphasized that  that is still a totally human cause and does not grant the joy of rebirth in  heaven. Thus, one should not be attached to [its] pleasures. The vehicle of  external ways, which allows rebirth in heaven, grants the pleasures of the  twenty heavens that span the space between the residence of the four heavenly  guardians at the bottom and the realm of nonthought at the top. Nonetheless,  it still leads to the hells, and is unable to release one from transmigration.  Thus, one should not be attached to [its] pleasures. The next vehicle enables  one to exit the triple world; nonetheless, it is really of an inferior order. Is it  not, in fact, unsatisfactory for those auditors (sravakas) who must pass either  three lifetimes [if intelligent] or sixty kalpas [if foolish: a kalpa is an extremely  long period of time], or seven or eight lifetimes just to take vows; or [for the  pratyekabuddhas] four lifetimes [if intelligent] or eight kalpas [if foolish] of  practice? Thus, one should not seek [its] pleasures. The two doctrines of the  Great Vehicle require that one forget about life and grant his wife and children  to others, and that one enter the ten thousand practices of the six perfections 

PRECEPT S FOR AN EMPERO R 163  

for a duration of three great incommensurable periods of time. The unbeliev ably great cosmic stone is high and wide and difficult to encompass, and the  heart-mind is frail and therefore eager to retreat and unable to advance easily.  Knowing that as a rule for every ten steps forward one takes nine steps back ward, how can one persist? The "way similar to reality" wipes away the mind's  filth and enables one to penetrates the realm of purity, and by harmonizing  the realms of perception and wisdom it allows one to attest to suchness; none theless, it is still representative of the pleasure of knowing that one is on the  path to truth and purity, and it therefore does not permit entry to the diamond  storehouse. Thus, one also avoids this sort of path. It may be said that the mind  of ultimate no-self-nature harmonizes with the realm of essence and attests to  the body in the three periods of time, and that it is comparable to Indra's net  and allows gain of the great unique body of essence; nonetheless, it is still the  cause of realization of buddhahood as incipient buddha. It is not possible to  complete the realization in the five aspects or the fourfold mandala. One should  not take this path either, because it seems to suggest that nonrealization is  realization, and that nonarrival is arrival.  

In this manner, basing oneself upon the teachings of the Tathagata and form ing the supreme wisdom, one is able to choose the best of all vehicles, and  thereby give rise to the mind of awakening. Should one board any of the pre ceding vehicles and tread these paths, however, one will not be able to realize  the pure mind of awakening. That is why the bodhisattvas of Shingon transcend  these various stages of the mind and give rise to the mind of awakening, and  practice such awakening. It is because they know the distinctions between the  vehicles that they produce the critical mind of profound wisdom.  

As far as the term "mind of awakening" is concerned, there are two major  distinctions. First is that which is potential, and second is that which is fictive.  In the case of the potential mind, imagine someone who wishes to do either  good or harm: first, he must have such an intention, and then he must perform  an act. Those who are in quest of the mind of awakening are not unlike persons  in this situation. Or take the case of a madman. . . . Thus it is clear that [mad 

men] are like drunken people who find themselves in the prison of the triple  world, and that, overcome by sleep, they lay themselves down in the bushes  of the six destinations. How could they possibly board the vehicle of super natural powers and swiftly return to the decorated seat of original awakening?  

The fictive mind of awakening is the body of the inexhaustibly beautiful  Diamond realm. The quadruple body and the fourfold mandala of Mahavai rocana are coexistent with all living beings, with which they forever share  absolute equality. However, people fail to realize this [truth] because the five  obstacles obstruct the way, or because the three delusions block their view like  a dense fog. If one meditates on the radiance of the sun and of the moon,  chants the mantras, is empowered by the triple mystery, and is versed in the  wonderful technique of the mystic hand gestures (mudrd), then the rays of the  universal sun will shine forth, and all obstacles of ignorance will instantly 

164 ALLAN G. GRAPAR D  

dissolve in the ocean of mind. Ignorance will instantly become knowledge, and  poison will become cure. The divinities of the seven parts of the diamond and  of the three parts of the womb mandalas will appear together in their circular  perfection, and buddhas and bodhisattvjjs as numerous as the specks of dust  in the desert or as drops of water in the ocean will spontaneously surge forth.  To establish residence in this meditation is called the samadhi of mysteries.  

The various tathagatas take these three - the compassionate mind, the criti cal mind, and the samadhi mind - and make them their precepts, which they  never abandon, even for a single moment. Why should these be called precepts?  There are two kinds of precepts. The first one is vinaya, which translates as  "control." The second is sila, which translates as "purity" and "calm." When  the Buddha sees living beings, he sees himself or the four objects of gratitude.  That is why he refrains from killing. When he contemplates living beings, he  sees his own body; that is why he does not steal their property. When he sees  living beings, he sees the objects of gratitude; that is why he does not think ill  or insult. . . . Since a buddha practices the compassionate mind, he naturally  stays away from the ten evil deeds. To stay away from the ten evil deeds is,  namely, the [semantic value of] precept as control. And since he stays away  from the evil mind, his mind is pure and calm; that is the precept of sila. It is  also called the precept of benefiting animate beings.  

Finally, when one looks at the preceding nine stages of the mind with pro found wisdom, it appears that they have no self-nature. It is like the winter  freeze that flows away with the thaw of spring, or like a piece of flint that  disappears as it produces fire. All phenomena (dharmas) are born of causes,  and therefore have no self-nature. That is why, ultimately, the resident of the  first stage, though he be one-sided in his evil mind, can become a resident of  the second stage if he comes into contact with the teachings of a good friend.  . . . It is because all these stages have no self-nature that one can go from one  to the next. Should one use wisdom to look at everything, then one naturally  avoids evil, practices only absolute good, and benefits all living beings. These  precepts are complete and perfect. It is the same for the samadhi of mysteries:  [armed] with these precepts, those who board this [Adamantine] Vehicle can  control their own body-mind and convert other living beings. Such are the  Buddha precepts of samaya of mysteries. 