+++
title = "Parvati"

+++
(“**daughter** of the mountain”) Wife of  
the god **Shiva**, and an important  
Hindu **goddess**, Parvati is the daughter  
of the minor deity **Himalaya** (the  
Himalaya Mountains personified), and  
his wife **Mena**. Parvati appears in  
human form to draw Shiva out of the  
**ascetic** isolation in which he has been  
lost since the death of his first wife,  
**Sati**, and to induce him to father the  
son necessary to kill the **demon**  
**Taraka**. According to her myths, even  
in her childhood Parvati vows that she  
will have only Shiva for her husband.  
Her parents try to discourage her,  
since Shiva has taken a vow of **asceticism** and is absorbed in deep meditation on Mount **Kailas**.  
Parvati’s first effort to arouse Shiva’s  
desire ends in a dismal failure. **Kama**,  
the god of love, tries to shoot Shiva with  
an arrow of desire, but Shiva lets loose a  
stream of fire from the third eye in his  
forehead, burning Kama to ash.  
Undeterred, Parvati goes into the mountains and begins a program of harsh  
physical asceticism (**tapas**) of her own:  
standing on one foot for immense periods of time, enduring the heat of summer and cold of winter, and practicing  
severe fasting (**upavasa**) and self-denial.  
The spiritual power generated by her  
asceticism eventually awakens Shiva,  
and he comes to her, disguised as an  
aged **brahmin**. He tries to discourage  
503  
Parvati  
Parvati by making disparaging remarks  
about Shiva’s lifestyle and personality, but  
Parvati, unshaken in her resolve, refuses  
to listen. Eventually Shiva reveals his true  
form to her, and they are married.  
Although in his devotion to his wife  
Shiva is the Hindu symbol for the ideal  
husband, their family life is unusual.  
Since Shiva is the symbol for the perfect  
ascetic, the couple has no fixed home or  
means of support, and occasionally  
Parvati is portrayed as complaining of  
being an ascetic’s wife. Symbolically, their  
marriage represents the domestication of  
504  
Parvati  
Parvati with her husband Shiva and their sons Ganesh and Skanda.  
the ascetic and his entrance into social  
and family life. Their union highlights  
the cultural tension between the two  
most important Hindu religious ideals:  
the householder and the renunciant  
ascetic. Perhaps to illustrate the contradiction of being a married ascetic, Shiva  
and Parvati have children but not in the  
normal way: **Skanda** develops from  
Shiva’s **semen**, which falls on the ground  
during their interrupted love-making,  
while **Ganesh** is formed of the enlivened  
dirt from Parvati’s body.  
Parvati, as with all married Hindu  
goddesses, is generally seen as benign  
and benevolent. In some mythic stories  
she can be spiteful, but on the whole she  
projects a nurturing and motherly presence. Her mythology is almost completely connected with that of Shiva,  
showing her subordination as the model  
wife, and her **worship** is generally connected with him as well. She occupies  
an important position in **tantra**, a  
secret, ritually based religious practice,  
since in tantric texts Parvati is usually  
portrayed as the person questioning  
Shiva and then as the student receiving  
his instruction. For more information  
on Parvati and all the goddesses of  
Hinduism, see David R. Kinsley, *Hindu*  
*Goddesses*, 1986.