+++
title = "Puri"

+++
City and sacred site (**tirtha**) on the Bay  
of Bengal in the state of **Orissa**. Puri is  
best known for its temple to the god  
**Jagannath**, a local **deity** assimilated  
533  
Puri  
Rath Yatra festival in Puri.  
into the pantheon as a form of the god  
**Krishna** and therefore, by extension, a  
form of **Vishnu**. The temple was completed in 1198 C.E. and is currently  
receiving much needed restoration,  
after several pieces fell off the tower in  
the early 1990s. The most important  
annual festival held in Puri is the **Rath**  
**Yatra**. During this festival, Jagannath,  
his brother **Balabhadra**, and his sister  
**Subhadra** are carried in procession  
through the city’s main street in enormous wooden carts. They travel to  
another temple about a mile away,  
where they stay for a week, and then  
return to Puri. Aside from the spectacle,  
the ceremony is an important ritual  
theater used to demonstrate the relationship between Jagannath and the  
kings of Puri, who were considered to  
be deputies ruling in his name.  
Although the kings no longer wield  
actual power in modern times, by  
virtue of their status they still play an  
important ritual role.  
Aside from containing the temple  
of Jagannath, Puri is one of the **four**  
**dhams**, which symbolically mark the  
geographic boundaries of India. It is  
also the home of the **Govardhan**  
**Math**, one of the four **Dashanami**  
**Sanyasi** sacred centers supposedly  
established by the philosopher  
**Shankaracharya**. Puri’s character as a  
holy city has made it an attractive  
place for religiously inclined people to  
make their homes, most notably the  
Bengali saint **Chaitanya** (1486–1533),  
who lived there for much of his adult  
life. The cultural life generated by the  
**worship** of Jagannath also made Puri  
a center for the arts, and it is the  
traditional home of the classical  
**dance** form known as **Orissi**. For further information see Anncharlott  
Eschmann, Hermann Kulke, and Gaya  
Charan Tripathi, *The Cult of*  
*Jagannath and the Regional Tradition*  
*of Orissa*, 1978; and Frederique Apffel  
Marglin, “Time Renewed: Ratha Jatra  
in Puri,” in T. N. Madan (ed.), *Religion*  
*in India*, 1991.