+++
title = "Rites of Protection"

+++
For many Hindus, the world is a ritually  
dangerous place. Certain hours, days,  
and periods of the **year** are considered  
inauspicious. At these times the very  
tone of the cosmos is disagreeable and  
all sorts of bad fortune can befall the  
ignorant or the unwary. Rites of protection are used to counter these dangers,  
as well as the problems of one’s past  
**karma**, which can be diagnosed through  
an inauspicious conjunction in one’s  
birth horoscope (**natal horoscope**).  
Some inauspicious times are unlucky  
only for certain types of activities.  
Potential misfortune can be avoided  
simply by refraining from these activities. However, certain events that cannot  
be avoided, such as **eclipses**, are also  
believed inauspicious. In such cases,  
one can prevent the negative effects of  
**inauspiciousness** by transferring it to  
another person, usually through the  
medium of gifts (**dana**); giving gifts is  
also the preferred means for getting rid  
of inauspiciousness stemming from a  
bad conjunction in one’s birth horoscope. People also safeguard themselves  
by performing prayer and **worship** as  
positive protective forces.  
Inauspicious forces are also generated by human jealousy, greed, and  
hatred, which can find their agency in  
black **magic**, the evil eye (**nazar**), or  
other sorts of **witchcraft**. Finally, some  
Hindus believe there are a host of nonhuman beings, such as spirits, **ghosts**,  
and witches, who sometimes seek to  
harm human beings through the exercise of supernormal powers. Despite the  
power and prevalence of all of these  
malevolent forces, if one is aware and  
careful of them there are ways to  
counter them.  
For problems stemming from human  
malice, there are well-established solutions. One is to avoid those people who  
are considered inauspicious, such as  
**widows**. Another strategy is to avoid  
inciting people’s jealousy by never proclaiming one’s good fortune too openly,  
praising a child too lavishly, or flaunting  
one’s wealth too freely. In many cases,  
people will counter potentially vulnerable moments in the life cycle by various  
protective rites. It is still common for  
574  
Rishi Panchami  
people to wear talismans or amulets,  
which are believed to protect the wearer.  
Another common protective measure is  
to carry iron, which is believed to render  
the person carrying it impervious to  
witchcraft. Young children will often  
have a black smudge of lamp-black put  
on their faces, to symbolically disfigure  
them and take away the motive for jealousy.  
Another protective strategy is to hang up  
an object (such as a clay pot with a  
painted face) intended to absorb all the  
bad feelings, which is then discarded.  
For further information see Lawrence  
Babb, *The Divine Hierarchy*, 1975; Gloria  
Goodwin Raheja, *The Poison in the Gift*,  
1988; and David F. Pocock, “The Evil  
Eye,” in T. N. Madan (ed.), *Religion in*  
*India*, 1991.