+++
title = "0474 Verse 620-621"

+++
> **Sanskrit text, Unicode transliteration and English translation by Ganganath Jha:** 
>
> कृत्स्नैकदेशशब्दाभ्यामयं चार्थः प्रकाश्यते ।  
> नैरंश्येनास्य किं वृत्तिः किं वा तस्यान्यथैव सा ॥ ६२० ॥  
> यथा पात्रादिसंस्थस्य श्रीफलादेर्यथाऽथवा ।  
> अनेकासनसंस्थस्य चैत्रादेरुपलक्षिता ॥ ६२१ ॥ 
>
> *kṛtsnaikadeśaśabdābhyāmayaṃ cārthaḥ prakāśyate* \|  
> *nairaṃśyenāsya kiṃ vṛttiḥ kiṃ vā tasyānyathaiva sā* \|\| 620 \|\|  
> *yathā pātrādisaṃsthasya śrīphalāderyathā'thavā* \|  
> *anekāsanasaṃsthasya caitrāderupalakṣitā* \|\| 621 \|\| 
>
> What is meant by (the question containing) the terms ‘in entirety’ and ‘in part’ is—does the substance subsist as an impartite whole,—in the way in which the bilva-fruit lies in a dish? Or does it subsist in some other way—as a certain person, caitra, does when lying down on several seats?—(620-621)



## Kamalaśīla’s commentary (tattvasaṃgrahapañjikā):

It has been argued (under *Text* 615 above) that “subsistence either in entirety or in part has not been perceived by you, etc. etc.”—This is answered in the following—[*see verses 620-621 above*]

What is meant by the term ‘in entirety’ is—whether the substance subsists in all its Components in its impartite form,—as is found in the case of the *Bilva-*fruit lying in a dish? *or in some other way*?—in the way, for instance, in which a person like *Caitra* lies down upon more than one couch. This is what is meant by subsistence ‘in part’.

This is only by the way.

*Uddyotakara* has argued as follows [in *Nyāyavārtika* on 2, 1. 32, *page* 216, Bib. Ind.):—“Inasmuch as the terms *entire* and *a part* cannot be applied to one and the same Composite, the question raised—as to whether it subsists *in its entirety* or *in part*—is an improper one; as a matter of fact, the term ‘entire’ stands for *all*, *excepting nothing*, while the term ‘a part’ stands for *one among several*; as such, these two terms cannot be rightly applied to any *one* Composite”.

This argument becomes rejected by what has been said in the Text. As a matter of fact, in common parlance, the terms *whole* and *in part* are found to be applied to such things as the *Foot* and the like, in such expressions as ‘Does the whole foot lie in the pond, or only in part?’—Nor can it be right to say that such use is figurative; because it is never found to fail or falter; as has been pointed out before.—(620-621)


