+++
title = "0576 Verse 777"

+++
> **Sanskrit text, Unicode transliteration and English translation by Ganganath Jha:** 
>
> अन्वयानुविधानं च सामान्येषु न विद्यते ।  
> सदाऽसत्त्वान्न नित्यानां व्यतिरेकस्तु संभवी ॥ ७७७ ॥ 
>
> *anvayānuvidhānaṃ ca sāmānyeṣu na vidyate* \|  
> *sadā'sattvānna nityānāṃ vyatirekastu saṃbhavī* \|\| 777 \|\| 
>
> As a matter of fact, there can be no affirmative concomitance (of the notions) with the universals: as their notion is not always present; as for negative concomitance, that is not possible in the case of what are eternal—(777)



## Kamalaśīla’s commentary (tattvasaṃgrahapañjikā):

The following might be urged—“Of the ‘Universal’ also, the capacity is well known and fully ascertained”.

The answer to this is as follows:—[*see verses 777 above*]

As a matter of fact the notions of ‘Being’ and such other Universals do not appear at all times; and hence it can never be right to assert the affirmative concomitance of these with the Universals. If the notions were really concomitant with the presence of the Universals, then, as the Universals would be there at all times, why could not the notions appear at all times? Specially as the Universal does not need anything else; because other things cannot create any peculiar capacities in it. Hence there can be no affirmative concomitance with these Universals.

Nor is negative concomitance possible. Because at the time that the notions of Being, etc. do not appear,—it cannot be said that the cause of this non-appearance lies in the non-existence of the Universal; because eternal things must be always present, and hence their *non-existence* (absence) is impossible. Consequently there can be no negative concomitance with the Universals.—(777)


