+++
title = "0714 Verse 973"

+++
> **Sanskrit text, Unicode transliteration and English translation by Ganganath Jha:** 
>
> लिङ्गसङ्ख्यादिसम्बन्धो न चापोहस्य विद्यते ।  
> व्यक्तेश्चाव्यपदेश्यत्वात्तद्द्वारेणापि नास्त्यसौ ॥ ९७३ ॥ 
>
> *liṅgasaṅkhyādisambandho na cāpohasya vidyate* \|  
> *vyakteścāvyapadeśyatvāttaddvāreṇāpi nāstyasau* \|\| 973 \|\| 
>
> “There can be no connection between the apoha and gender, number, etc. as the individual is inexpressible, there can be no connection through that either.”—[*Ślokavārtika*-*Apoha* 135]—(973)



## Kamalaśīla’s commentary (tattvasaṃgrahapañjikā):

The following *Text* points out another objection:—[*see verse 973 above*]

‘*Gender*’—Masculine, Feminine and Neuter.

‘*Number*’—Singular, Dual, Plural.

‘*Etcetera*’—Stands for the connection of Action (Verb), Time (Tense) and so forth.

There can be no connection between those and *Apoha*, as this latter is a *non-entity*; while the factors mentioned are all properties of *Entities*. Nor can the word ever denote anything devoid of the said Gender, etc. What is meant is that in this way the Proposition (of the Apohist) is contrary to experience.

It might be argued that—‘The Particular (Individual) which forms the substratum of *Exclusion* is an entity, and it can therefore have the necessary connection with Gender, etc. and through that, these can be attributed to the *Apoha* also’.

The answer to this is—‘*As the Individual*, *etc. etc*.’;—that is to say, the said Individual, being ‘indeterminate’ (hence *inexpressible*), cannot be spoken of as connected with Gender, Number, etc.; how then could these be attributed to the *Apoha*, through the Individual?—(973)


