+++
title = "1968 Verse 3145-3146"

+++
> **Sanskrit text, Unicode transliteration and English translation by Ganganath Jha:** 
>
> साक्षात्प्रत्यक्षदर्शित्वाद्यस्याशुचिरसादयः ।  
> स्वसंवेद्याः प्रसज्यन्ते को नु तं कल्पयिष्यति ॥ ३१४५ ॥  
> नच वेदोपवेदाङ्गप्रत्यङ्गाद्यर्थबोधनम् ।  
> बुद्धादेर्दृश्यते वाक्यं स सर्वज्ञः कथं मुधा ॥ ३१४६ ॥ 
>
> *sākṣātpratyakṣadarśitvādyasyāśucirasādayaḥ* \|  
> *svasaṃvedyāḥ prasajyante ko nu taṃ kalpayiṣyati* \|\| 3145 \|\|  
> *naca vedopavedāṅgapratyaṅgādyarthabodhanam* \|  
> *buddhāderdṛśyate vākyaṃ sa sarvajñaḥ kathaṃ mudhā* \|\| 3146 \|\| 
>
> “If the person has the direct perception of all things, then he should have direct knowledge of such tastes, etc. also as are unclean;—who could assume the existence of such a person?”—(3145) 
>
> “As a matter of fact, the words of the Buddha and others are not found to provide any knowledge of what is contained in the Vedas, the Upavedas and the subsidiary sciences and their auxiliaries; how then can such a person be regarded as ‘omniscient’, without reason?”—(3146)



## Kamalaśīla’s commentary (tattvasaṃgrahapañjikā):

[*verse 3145*]:

The following *Text* shows that the said attempt of the Buddhist to prove the Omniscient Person is not only futile,—it also involves something undesirable for him:—[*see verse 3145 above*]

The following might be urged—The omniscience of the Teacher has been inferred by the Buddhists from the fact of His having propounded the teaching of the truth regarding all things; hence this Inference annuls the *Mīmāṃsaka’s* ‘Proposition’ [that ‘there can be no Omniscient Person’]; and his Reason also is inadmissible.

Anticipating this objection, the *Mīmāṃsaka* supplies the following answer:—[*see verse 3146 above*]

[*verse 3146*]:

*Vedas*—named ‘*Ṛk*’, ‘*Yajuṣ*’ and ‘*Sāman Upavedas*’—*Āyurveda, Dhanurveda* and the like.—‘*Subsidiary Sciences*’—the six subsidiaries of the Veda, in the shape of *Śikṣā*, *Kalpa*, *Vyākaraṇa*, *Nirukta*, *Chandas* and *Jyotiṣa*—‘*Auxiliaries*’—the parts of these, in the shape of Verbal Roots, etc. including the Commentaries, etc. of these.

The ‘*artha*’ of these is what is contained in them.

Of this ‘*artha*’, ‘contents’, of the said works,—no knowledge is provided by the words of *Buddha* and other Teachers. That is, no words of the *Buddha* are found to expound what is contained in the Veda, etc. As a matter of fact, no such Person is found who has composed a Scripture that provides the knowledge of all things; the reason for this being that the various scriptures are found to deal with different subjects.—(3146)


