+++
title = "05 THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY"

+++

WHETHER one is concerned with acts of worship, or holy places, or simply patterns of daily living, one is bound to become involved with one or other of the laws of purity, for these affect all areas of Zoroastrian life. The purity code of this ancient faith is a complex one, and some of its elements plainly go back to distant, pre Zoroastrian times. These elements were developed and refined upon in the light of the prophet's dualistic teachings, and new ones were added. The resulting code was of immense importance to the ortho dox, for they held that there was a threefold path to God, through acts of worship, observance of the purity laws, and ethical behaviour.

One of the evidently ancient elements in this code is belief in the ritual and actual cleanliness of the cow and its products. This belief, shared by the Hindus, must have evolved during the millennia spent by the ancestors of the Indians and Iranians as nomads herding cattle on the Asian steppes. During this great stretch of time they must have depended on their cattle for almost everything-for meat, drink, clothing, and also for the cleansing agent provided by their urine, with its ammonia content. The Indo-Iranians were naturally not alone among the peoples of the world in using urine for hygienic purposes; but it is a part of the immense conservatism of their descendants that both Hindus and Zoroastrians continued to employ it down to the twentieth century. So in orthodox Sharif abad cattle urine was still regarded as 'clean' even without consecra tion, a fact that was brought home to me by a trivial incident early in my stay there. I was standing with some of the Belivani children watching the cow turning Faridun Rashidi's oil-press, when she stopped to stale. I stepped back to avoid the splash, and Gushtasp looked at me with surprise and said: 'There's no need. It's clean.'

Gushtasp's attitude was natural, since for him the urine was the proper means for cleansing away pollutions and disinfecting all that was unclean, within and without. For external use it was taken directly from any bull, cow, or calf, and was called in Dari pājów (from older pădyāb), a circumlocution for the factual term gömēz.

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY

93 For internal use, it had to be taken with special care from particular animals, in order to be pure enough to be consecrated. There was a long religious service for this purpose, the Yašt-e Nīrang-dīn, which was a Vendidad with especial rites, solemnized accordingly at night; and by transference the consecrated urine itself came to be referred to as nirang-din, and then, more simply, as nirang. In this case, D. Khodadad said, the urine should be taken from bull-calves, preferably white in colour, though in practice golden-brown ones had generally to be used. The chosen calves, or young bulls, were brought into two stalls in the old 'Gahāmbār Khāna' in Yazd, and were kept there for seven days, during which time they were given pure water to drink, and were fed on ritually clean food, offered them with recital of Avestan. The urine, taken on the seventh day, must not be taken during Rapatven Gah (that is, the noontide watch), but only during the morning and afternoon ones. A vessel was meticulously washed and dried for the purpose, and thereafter the liquid was strained through muslin into glass vessels. The initial service of consecration was carried out by seven priests, and thereafter a Vendidad should be solemnized over the nirang on the next six nights, to make a sevenfold consecration. Then the nirang, placed in stop pered glass jars, was set under the earth for forty days (either in a cellar or in a hole in the ground), before being taken into use. All agreed that the longer it could be kept the better, and an ideal time was thought to be seven years, five beneath the ground and two above. D. Mihraban-e Syavakhsh of Yazd told me that his father, an old priest, had indeed a small quantity by him that had been consecrated forty years (i.e. a very long time) previously. As it aged, the liquid became odourless and colourless. The last time that the elaborate service of consecration had been performed at the Gaham bar Khana in Yazd was in 1961, when D. Khodadad went from Sharifabad to join six other priests who were versed in the Vendidad. After the sevenfold rites, each priest took a share of the nirang for use in his own parish. What D. Khodadad brought back to Sharifabad would be exhausted, he said, by 1965, and there was no hope of consecrating any more with due observances, since there were no longer the priests able to perform the ceremony.

1 Nirang being used in so many fundamental rites of purification, its due consecration was regarded as immensely important, and there are detailed descriptions of the service in the Rivayats (see Uavala, i, 576-85; Dhabhar, 347– 57). It is still performed nine or ten times a year among the Parsis, and the detailed description of it given me by Dr. Firoze M. Kotwal (who had solemnized it

.

.

ZISTICOU

14GAYTUN

94

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY To understand the uses of nirang and pajow in combating pollution one has to comprehend what constitutes uncleanness for the ortho dox Zoroastrian. The essential doctrine of the faith in this respect is that Ohrmazd created this world both perfect and static. The first man, animal, and plant all existed in a state of physical maturity and perfection, at the centre of a motionless world, with the sun ever at noon; and the process of change, involving imperfection and decay, is the work of Ahriman, who attacked the perfect creation of Ohrmazd and corrupted it, bringing on it sickness, blight, old age, and death, as well as all the range of moral and physical defects. The striving of Ohrmazd and all his creation in the present time is directed towards overcoming these evils and restoring the world to its pristine, unchanging perfection; and the purity laws are essentially a series of battle orders, whereby the individual receives his instruc tions for combating the Adversary and his works during the course of his own daily life, and so helping in this great cosmic endeavour.

Some of the ways in which this battle is to be fought are straight forward and can be generally appreciated (according, indeed, with modern ideas of hygiene and conservation). Others are particular to Zoroastrianism. Thus, since dirt, stench, and disorder belong to Ahriman, the housewife is beginning the day's campaign when she sweeps her home before sunrise, and fumigates it with sweet smelling herbs. In Sharifabad it was usual, when doing this, first to sprinkle water over the courtyard in order to lay the dust;

"

-

-

--

himself in Navsari) tallied exactly with the prescriptions set out in the Rivayats. Nothing is said there about the need for seven priests, or seven performances of the Vendidad, and these would appear therefore to be subsequent elaborations, Of the aoimals to be used it is merely stated that bulls are best, and failing them oxen. In India the Parsis evolved the custom of consecrating a white bull and keeping him both to provide hairs for the varas or metal ring used in all major acts of worship (hence his name, the varasya), and usine for nirang; but they too used ordinary bulls as well to provide enough urine for the service of con secration, contenting themselves with bringing these into a sacred precinct a day beforehand to the bellowed wrath of the yarasya). In Navsari the extra bulls were tethered in the courtyard and a hall of the Wadi Dar-e Mihr. For a sketch plan and description of the Yazdi 'Gahambar Khane see G. Gropp, 'Die rezenten Feuertempel der Zarathustrier (11)', AMI, N.F, 4, 1971, 275, 276. This remarkably spacious and impressive structure is pace Dr. Gropp) modern in its present form, like all other Zoroastrian ones of any size, having been rebuilt within recent memory. The use of nirang was abandoned early in the present century by reformist Parsis, who substituted wine instead; and most Irani Zoroastrians have likewise adopted wine or fruit juice now for this purpose.

2 On these doctrines and their consequences see in more detail Boyce, History, vol. i, ch. 6.

---

1..

.

PrITIT T1 Trimm Too Tom Mi

n

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY

95 and this was permissible, since there is nothing essentially impure in dust. (In the Yazdi plajn it consists indeed mostly of desert sand and grit blown into the wrong place.) It is held, however, in ortho doxy, that a human being is unclean on rising, being contaminated by the impurities of the hours of sleep; and so the old custom (now observed only by priests) was that a person should wash first with pajow, to remove these impurities, then say the košti-prayers, and only finally, being clean once more in body and soul, make an ablution with water. For water is one of the seven creations of Ohrmazd, and as such its purity must be guarded no less than that of the other six. So if some actual impurity is known or suspected, then this should first be removed by something which will make a barrier between it and the pure element of water. Similarly, there is an absolute prohibition against using the pure creation of fire to burn up waste matter. Nothing whatever may be put on fire except clean fuel, and the other offerings proper to it; and though meals may be cooked by fire, this should be done with precaution. Thus a Zoroastrian housewife was careful never to fill a pot too full, lest there should be spills or splashes; and if during the baking of bread a round of dough fell into the oven-fire, this was an offence which demanded an expiation, such as the recital of a certain pumber of Ataš Niyayeš (the prayer to fire). It was firmly believed in Sharifabad that, if left unatoned for, such offences would be punished, Thus on one occasion while I was in the village Shehriar, D. Khodadad's . son, had a painful sty in one eye, and this he attributed to his having carelessly flicked a pellet of earth into their hearth-fire. So (though not neglecting to have treatment from the Ardekani doctor), he showed his contrition by reciting several Ataš Niyayeš.

This respect for fire and water sets the Zoroastrian apart from the adherents of all other faiths; and since it is only Zoroastrians who have purity laws with regard to these and the other five creations, to the orthodox all non-Zoroastrians are necessarily both unclean themselves and a threat to the cleanness of the world. Orthodox Shii Moslems keep no less strictly a differently based purity code, and so in the Yazdi region the two communities confronted one another with mutual reserve. To the Zoroastrian the Moslem was a bāmerd-e nā-pak 'an unclean so-and-so', to the Moslem the

Tom

3 The Sharifabadis could offer to explanation of the word båmerd; possibly it is from *nāmerd 'Uomensch'. They also called their Moslem neighbours Arabs', and regularly spoke of Ardekad as Arabestān, 'the place of the Arabs'.

96

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY Zoroastrian was a gor-e nājes 'an impure unbeliever'; and the two parties sought accordinglyto keep physical contact with one another to a minimum. This was strikingly ilłustrated at Elabad, where a Zoro astrian benefactor built a covered water-tank to provide drinking water for the whole village, Moslem as well as Zoroastrian. The water-supply was in common; but two sets of steps led down to the tank, side by side, separated by a rail, and at the bottom of each was a tap, so that no Moslem hand need touch the Zoroastrian one, and vice versa. A similar arrangement was to be found in a number of other villages with mixed populations, provided always by a Zoro astrian (no Moslem ever allowed Zoroastrians to share in his benefaction). In Sharifabad itself each community had its own tank; but in the heat of summer it was customary for an official to ride about among the workers in the fields on a donkey laden with two big pitchers of water and with two drinking-mugs, one on one side for Zoroastrians, and one on the other for Moslems. It is true that the official himself had to belong to one or other faith, and to handle both mugs; but at least he was a man, and so not liable to the great uncleanness of women, which was the source of the liveliest apprehension for the Zoroastrians. Even so, those Zoroastrians who were maintaining strict ritual purity would not accept water from this source, but preferred to remain thirsty under the blazing sun. Moslem feeling in such matters could be just as strong, as I ex perienced once when alone with a group of Sharifabadi children in the main street of Yazd. It was a burning summer's day, and we were on our way to the mountain shrine of Nareke, on the further side of the city. One of the smallest children, thirsty after the journey from the village, begged for a drink of water. Her elder sister, not knowing the ways of Yazd, approached a street fountain, and at once we were SUITounded by an angry group of Moslems, and the old hostile cry of gor-e najes went up around us. Fortunately at that moment the adults of the Zoroastrian party returned, and we were hastily bundled into a car and driven away. Even without this timely rescue we should probably have suffered nothing worse than jostling and insults, for police protection of Zoroastrians was vigorous in 1964; but in earlier times physical violence would certainly have followed, unless indeed some more liberal-minded Moslems had themselves inter vened.4

+ For a nineteenth-century instance of intervention by a Moslem on behalf of a Zoroastrian in the streets of Yazd see E. G. Browne, A Year amongst the Persians,

ARE

97

-1.447RRE

LV-1d

-

--

-

*1,

--

-

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY In Sharifabad itself children quickly learnt the conventions that separated the two communities. The Zoroastrians were still a good deal dependent on Moslem craftsmen and traders, and so Moslems came fairly frequently to their houses. There they were received with Persian courtesy, which naturally entailed offering food and drink; but this an orthodox Moslem would politely refuse, as was expected of him. I saw this myself in a striking way in the Belivani household, when a Moslem woman, a professional quilt-maker, came to the house several days in succession to help make up padded cotton quilts for winter bedding. All was friendliness, gossip was exchanged, and there was even much laughter, for quilt-making involves at a certain point pulling on the quilt to stretch it, and this developed into a joyous tug-of-war between fifteen-year-old Pourandukht and the quilt-maker. Nevertheless, during all the hot summer hours that the Moslem woman was at the house she never once accepted so much as a drink of water, producing various polite excuses for not doing so, which were equally politely accepted by Tahmina Khaaon, although both were well aware of the real reason, the rigid barrier which the purity laws set between them in such respects.

Sometimes, however, where individuals were concerned, human kindness and courtesy made breaches in strict observance. Thus once at one of the mountain shrines a friendly Moslem driver, of casual orthodoxy, insisted on cooking food for his Zoroastrian passengers from another village; and Agha Rustam and his daughter Piruza, rather than create disharmony, accepted a pressing invitation to join them; but on their retum to Sharifabad they went to the priest's house and drank nirang (ritually administered, with utterance of Avestan), in order to cleanse away the impurity which would otherwise have destroyed the purity conferred by their pilgrimage, Avoidance of food prepared by unbelievers was formerly common to the Irani and Indian communities, and down to the early nineteenth century even a Parsi layman could be made 'out caste' or excom municated for eating such food.

As to uncooked foodstuffs, down to the early twentieth century the Yazdi Zoroastrians had only limited occasion to procure these from Moslems, being forced by poverty to live fargely from their own 415–16. Once when I was with Tahmina Khanom in Yazd a small boy called her Görög, 'Little gör to her face in the street. Had she been on home-ground in Ardekan, she said, she would have cuffed him soundly, but in unfamiliar Yazd she let it pass. The Sharifabadis had immense spirit, and despite their small numbers resisted local Moslem pressures sturdily.

-

-

-

-

--

-

..

-JN

-

-

--

-

-

98

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY produce; but some things they were obliged to buy, for instance cooking oil, since Zoroastrians were not allowed to own presses. They then boiled and strained the bought oil to purify it for their own use. For holy occasions, however, they preferred to use the rendered fat of a sacrificial animal, which would keep a year or two in a cool cellar. The first Zoroastrian in Sharifabad to defy the age long ban and have his own press was Agha Rustam's father, Nosh iravan, who set up a small one, turned by a cow, in a yard behind his house. With this he pressed seeds of the castor plant to yield pure oil to burn in sanctuary lamps. (Tahmina Khanom vividly recalled helping him in the early days of her marriage.) Later Paridun Rashidi set up a press in his turn to express the more costly sesame seed oil for ritual cooking. The demand for this at festival times was great, and in summer the work was arduous because of the heat (the seeds having to be roasted first); but it was accounted highly meritorious, because it contributed to the celebration of the gahambars and other holy feasts. Formerly it was only on holy days that the villagers tasted meat, from the sacrifices, but by the 1960s they had accustomed themselves to buying small quantities for ordinary use from a little shop in the Moslem quarter (holding that the sio of slaying an animal without the proper rites was on the butcher's head). This meat, and any fruit or herbs which they bought from Moslems, they washed with great care on getting it home. Vegetable fat in tins was held to be clean enough for everyday purposes (being, it was thought, untouched by hand), but it was never used on holy days for ritual cooking.

Impurity by no means came wholly from the unbeliever, but, demon-created, could penetrate everywhere. Hence there was need for an embracing purity code, which is set out in all its final scholastic elaboration in the late Pahlavi books and the Rivayats. Its workings can be traced in almost full force among orthodox Parsis down to the nineteenth century; but in the Yazdi area some of the ancient rules evidently came to be relaxed during the harsh oppressions of late Safavid and early Qajar times, when the community as a whole was reduced to dire poverty, and had evidently neither the energy nor means to maintain all the old prescriptions. A number continued to be strictly observed, however, although by 1964 even in orthodox Sharifabad it was noticeable that the older people tended to keep them both more conscientiously and with a greater awareness of their doctrinal basis than did the younger generation.

5 For references see Boyce, History, ch. 12.

THE LAWS, AND RITES OF PURITY

99 Within the general concept of all things being impure which had been brought into existence by Ahriman, there were certain cate gories of things which traditionally the Zoroastrians regarded as polluting. Thus all that leaves the human body is impure to a greater or lesser extent, including even the breath (which is why a Zoroastrian priest wears a veil over nose and mouth when he consecrates ritual objects, or is in the presence of what has been consecrated). Probably here ancient taboos have been brought together and elaborated in the light of the Zoroastrian doctrine that the original perfect creation was static, neither absorbing anything nor giving anything out. Coughing and sneezing are there fore deprecated, and since saliva is impure, no Zoroastrian should ever eat from the same plate as another, or drink from a glass which another has used-a rule most strictly observed by the Parsis. But this is one of the ancient restrictions which had come to be dis regarded during the years of poverty and oppression, and was only strictly kept by priests, or at times when absolute ritual purity was sought for. Otherwise mother and children, or a pair of friends, often ate from the same plate; and at festival times it was usual for one wine glass to circulate for the drinking of toasts. Even in the houses of the wealthy in Yazd it was not uncommon to have only two or three glasses set on the table for the use of any who chose out of a numerous company. With this breakdown in the old purity laws which in this case were at one with modern ideas of hygiene went also the old prescription of eating in silence, a rule imposed, so the Pahlavi books say, out of respect for Hordad and Amurdad, the Amabraspands of water and plants.

In these respects D. Khodadad maintained rules abandoned by the laity; and he did his utmost to avoid touching any food which was prangin 'unclean', that is, tasted already by another, or in any other way not ritually pure. Ideally he would have liked to follow the old rule that a priest should eat food prepared only by himself, or by the women of a priestly house, who would know and strictly keep the rules of purity in every detail; but ministering as he did to three villages, he often had to accept hospitality from his lay parishioners. He would, naturally, never eat food prepared by an unbeliever.

Even more unclean than what leaves a healthy body naturally is any flow of blood, for primitive dread in this respect is reinforced by the doctrine that afflictions of every sort are Ahrimanic, attacks

Cf. above, p. 46.

T

.

ITUT

100

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY by the evil powers on the ideal state of physical wholeness. So bleeding from a cut or a pulled tooth makes a person unclean, and menstruation, being regarded as a recurrent sickness, is held to be almost the worst of all pollutions, and down the millennia the priests elaborated restrictions to lessen its evil effects. According to them 'the fiend that sits in a menstruous woman is the worst of all fiends in the world; for there is no fiend whose look alone can make a thing unclean, save only the fiend in a menstruous woman. ... She afflicts and injures, knowingly or unknowingly, all the good creatures and creations of Ohrmazd’.7 Such a one, it is held, cannot properly address the divine beings, and so she takes off the kušti during these days and does not pray. This gives rise to a polite circumlocution for a woman in this state, who is said to be bi-namaz *without prayer'; and since the mere glance of the bi-namaz was held to be contaminating, the harsh old usage was for her to with draw and shut herself away from the rest of the household in a place where she could not see sky or water, earth, plants or animals, men or fire. This custom led to the Dari colloquial expression to describe a woman's withdrawal at this time, as lok sda, going to the hole'. This had no literal meaning for the younger generation, for memory of the old rigours was fading fast, and its full significance first came home to me when I visited a house in Yazd owned by D. Khodadad. This had belonged to his father, a very orthodox priest, but had been untenanted and therefore unaltered for thirty-six years. Part of the building was thought to be at least a hundred years old, and here my guide, D. Khodadad's young married daughter Parizad, led me into a small yard, in which there was a tiny windowless mud-brick building, some five feet high by four feet across, thick walled, and with a doorway only four feet by two feet. This, Parizad thought, must have been a hen-house; but her mother Piruza, joining us, explained that it was in fact the old ganza-e punidun, the place for a menstruous woman, the 'hole' of the idiom. The

7 The oldest scriptural treatment of this subject is in Vd. 16. This is elaborated in greater detail in the Pahlavi Vd., Šnš, iii, and the Rivayats (see Unvala, i. 205 ff.; Dhabhar, 201 ff.). On observances among the Parsis in the early twentieth century see Modi, CC, 165-6.

8 The history of this usage is, however, puzzling. It is common to the Iranis and Parsis, which would ordinarily suggest that it could be traced back to at least the ninth century; but that women should continue to pray during their periods is not only indicated in Snš. (ed. Tavadia) iii. 32, but is positively en joined in the Rivayats (see Uovala, i. 208.9, 216.15-16; Dhabhar 214, 221).

9 See 'Zoroastrian houses", 138-42.

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY

101 narrow doorway would have been covered by a curtain when the place was in use, making it very dark. Inside the tiny cell it was im possible to stand upright or to stretch out at full length; and it must have become stillingly hot there in summer, for mud-brick absorbs and holds the heat, and there was no way of creating a cooling current of air. Here a woman who was bi-namaz sat by day and slept by night, safely shut away from all the creations and so made powerless to injure them. This harsh usage arose logically from the doctrine of the pollution lurking in a woman's gaze during this time. It was first recorded by a European traveller in the seventeenth century, to but the likelihood is that Zoroastrian women had suffered under it for countless generations previously.

Parizad was as much startled as I was by this glimpse into the past, for the observance had been much relaxed in the present century. This relaxation started among the wealthier families in Yazd, and spread thence to the villages. 11 In 1964 Sharifabadi women in their seventies could well remember how in youth they had spent all the days of their bi-namāzi in the dark ganza-e punidun; but these places had by then been destroyed, and the existing customs, though harsh enough, were less exacting. Segregation, that is, was still en forced, but not for so long or so completely. There were, however, still many onerous rules to be observed. Special clothes were kept for this time, which, though scrupulously washed and clean, were ritually impure, being reserved for this purpose. If, therefore, ordi nary clothes become accidentally polluted (as by contact with a corpse), they are set aside, after cleansing, for use during bi-namazi. More usually the clothes were simply old ones, faded and shabby with use; and all ornaments, such as bracelets and rings, were laid aside, since nothing put on during these days might be worn at any other time. The bi-namaz also put on old shoes, either the local cotton give, or plastic sandals, either of which could be washed: In the ordinary way the villagers often went barefoot in summer, which was both economical and pleasant; but during menses a woman must never put an unshod foot to the ground, for this would pollute the earth, and grievously offend its guardian, Spendarmad. Having put on these old garments, the bi-namaz withdrew to the end of a passage or the corner of a room or courtyard, and there she

10 See J. B. Tavernier, Six voyages en Turquie, en Perse et aux Indes, Eng. traoşl., London, 1684, iv. 166.

I For some details see "Zoroastrian houses', 142.

.-M

:102

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY remained for the next three days. She might sleep there too at night, or perhaps in summer take her bedding to a corner of the roof. This bedding, like her clothes, must be kept solely for this time, and consisted usually of thin worn quilts which could be easily washed. In priestly theory the bi-namaz should simply sit or sleep during these three days, doing nothing whatsoever; but even women of priestly family in Iran and India) assured me that they never accepted this, and the village women roundly declared that, if the rich ladies of the city could afford to be idle, they could not. So they kept for this time dull sewing jobs, such as mending old clothes or patching the heavy cloths used in the fields. No embroidery or attractive needle work was done then, and anything which was handled had to be purified afterwards by being steeped in pajow and left to dry in the sun.

The women in general loved bright colours and pretty things, and it was sad to see one of them thus eclipsed, sitting in the shadows in faded garments, bent over some plain and laborious handiwork. She was no longer, however, cut off from the life of the family. According to the priests of old, a righteous man became impure even by exchanging words with a woman at such a time; but I never saw the slightest reluctance on the part of anyone to speak to a bi-namaz, and a wife could therefore offer counsel and direct her household as a woman might from a sick-bed. Nevertheless, for the first three days she was forced to be a helpless burden upon others. She could not prepare food, or fetch it for herself when it was prepared. It must be set before her on a special dish, preferably of plated copper or glass (earthenware or tin were regarded as porous and therefore unsuitable). Her drinking-cup too was kept separate and had to be filled for her. If she stirred her tea, it should be with a silver spoon, for a tin one could not be made 'clean' again; failing this, it was best she should use a twig, that could be thrown away. The Rivayats required that the bi-namaz should be given less food than usual, and with the change from an active to a suddenly sedentary life this happens to be sensible. Such food as there was must be plain, and this rule was carefully observed by the villagers, who ate mostly bread at these times (without such relishes as cheese or herbs), and avoided all pungent or strong-smelling foods. This discipline, like all the rest, was self-imposed. I once saw, for instance, a small boy bring some roasted melon seeds and put them down before his mother, and she had almost taken some before she remembered her

103

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY condition, and hastily drew back. After the third day, the bi-namaz bad more freedom to move about, and some took considerable advantage of this; but even the laxest refrained during the whole of her period from baking bread, or setting foot on the pesgam-e mas, or tending the household fire. If she left the house, she walked carefully along the lanes, avoiding contact with anyone else, and trying not to go near running water. She would not sniff even at a distance the wind-blown scent of flowers, lest her enjoyment should wither them, nor would she pass beyond the lanes into the open fields, for fear of polluting the fertile earth and blighting the crops.

The harsh climate of Yazd sometimes made the regulations of bi-namazi physically hard to endure. Thus a series of ablutions had come to be prescribed for this time, to be made in winter as well as summer. In the Rivayats (which in this respect reinforce the teachings of older works), it is strictly enjoined that a bi-namaz, being 'unclean', should not wash at all with water, but use only pajow;12 and this prohibition was obeyed into the twentieth century by Parsi women. There were, however, a number of observances common to menstruation and to the purification of the nine nights' (the barašnom-e no-swa), both being concerned with uncleanness; and it appears that because of this common element, in Persia after the seventeenth century some usages proper only to the latter came to be adopted also for the former. Thus the practice of three ablu tions, which should be peculiar to no-šwa, came to be enjoined also for the time of bi-namazi, although doctrinally this was unjustifiable. Each ablution was performed in the open air, in a sheltered corner of the house-yard. The bi-namaz stood on a slab of stone, or failing this on bare earth, and a woman or girl who was 'clean' poured warm water over her from head to foot. In Yazd in this century the ablution was often made in a screened corner of the roof, but this was not approved in Sharifabad, since, although the living earth

can shake itself free from impurity', a man-made roof cannot. The threefold ablutions took place usually on the first, third, and seventh day of the period (though there was some variation over the second ablution, which might also be performed on the fourth or fifth day). No ablution was ever performed at night. Although the practice might be tolerable, indeed pleasant in summer, it was an ordeal during the searing cold of winter days. Even when there was

12 See e.g., Pahl. Vd. 7; Šnš. 3.16, 21b; Riv., Dhabhar, 214, 218, 569.

WR.

104

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY show on the ground, the older Sharifabadi women made their ablu tion in the open, but the younger generation was less hardy, and in really bitter weather girls sought the shelter of a byre, at least for the second and third ablutions, when the impurity was felt to be less. (In large town-houses there was a stone-floored room set aside for these occasions.) For the first ablution an urgent message often had to be sent to a neighbour for her help; and it was after this that the bi-namaz put on the old, shabby clothes proper to the occasion. According to the Rivayats she should also put on a special sedra and košti (the sacred shirt and girdle), and should re-tie the košti seven times a day,13 but in Persia women became accustomed to laying both aside, shirt and girdle, since it was held that they ought not to pray at this time. This usage may have arisen in part from the fact that, since the custom developed of making three ablutions, a woman had need of two complete sets of old clothes, the second to be put on after the second ablution; and she would therefore have needed two extra shirts and girdles, an additional elaboration and expense. The clothes laid aside after the second ablution were washed for the bi-namaz by a 'clean' woman or girl. They were never washed in running water, but in a bowl; and the water in which they had been washed was poured away carefully in a corner where the sun's rays could reach and swiftly cleanse the suffering earth. (It caused Zoroastrians much distress when Moslem women washed such clothes in the running water of the village stream.) If in winter the bi-namaz wore a thick garment (such as a cloth jacket or sheepskin coat) which was difficult to wash each month, this would be sprinkled with pajow and put in the sun to be purified.

Another physical hardship of bi-namazi arose from the fact that the village houses were unheated during the bitterly cold winter. By day the villagers ordinarily kept warm by working, and at night families slept huddled snugly together; but the bi-namaz must sit still all day and sleep alone at night, banished from the company of husband or sisters. (Only a nursing infant might stay with its mother, sharing perforce her uncleanness.) I saw what hardships this could cause when I spent a week in early February at the house of Shehriar Zohrabi in Mazra Kalantar, when his wife Shirin was bi-namaz. The cold was piercing, and the small brazier in the living room was lit only when tea was made, and then gave out a fugitive warmth. Shirin sat in a corner huddled in a sheepskin cloak kept

13 See p. 100 n. 8, above.

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY

105 specially for this purpose, in which she also slept at night, but even so she shivered. Her smallest child, a girl, was only a toddler, and it needed constant coaxing and commands by the mother to keep the infant away from her, with some help from her only slightly older brothers.

In this instance the family was lucky in that there was a young girl, a neighbour's daughter, living with them, who was able to take over the cooking and cleaning and care of the children; but there was often real hardship incurred in keeping the restrictions of bi-namazi. Neighbours tried to help out, but sometimes the man had to add all the household tasks to his own burden of field-work. The restrictions could also press heavily on a girl living alone with elderly grand parents, who were incapable of taking over her tasks (as was the case for Shahnaz, Agha Rustam's eldest daughter). In such difficult circumstances each did the best she could to keep the prescriptions. Even in a big household matters were not always easy, and Agha Rustam's daughter Pourandukht recalled, with a mixture of pride and laughter, a heroic occasion when she was only twelve years old, and her mother and two elder sisters became bi-namaz together, and she had to wait on all three of them, look after her father, care for three younger children; tend the stock, and cook and clean (all of which, her mother testified, she had accomplished remarkably well). The afiiction was often sadly ill-timed, coming upon several at once, as on this occasion, or at the most vexatious moments. I saw a young wife compelled by it to remain shabby and aloof when her husband had just returned after many months' absence, and she longed to make herself pretty and to welcome him home. At another time Sarvar and her step-daughter Parichihr were bi-namaz together on a day when there was a big gahambar at their house, and both had to abandon their home abruptly in the midst of the preparations, leaving friends and neighbours to cook the food and receive the guests in their stead.

One of the liveliest dreads of the Zoroastrian woman was to be taken untimely by her menses in a holy place; and often a woman would refrain from going on pilgrimage through fear of this happening. In Sharifabad a girl had been afflicted in this way at the mountain shrine of Pir-e Hrišt about two years before I was there. She left the shrine at once, but was so shocked by the sin which she had involuntarily committed that despite hospital treatment she remained prostrate and in pain for nearly a year,

106

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY until the strict performance of certain expiatory rites helped her to recover.14

Although to become bi-namaz for the first time was trouble and grief for a girl, yet it marked her entry into womanhood, and formerly sherbet and sweetmeats were distributed by her parents when it happened, although this custom had fallen into disuse. If the girl were already betrothed, her fiancé's family should send her presents, called bar-loki 'for the door of the hole'-a new košti upon a tray, with some raw cotton, a piece of woven cloth, a mirror, comb, and stockings. After this, only pregnancy and old age gave a woman respite from the monthly ritual impurity. When menstrua tion ceased, the priests recommended of old that a woman should pay for the performance of a Davāzdab Hamast, that is, the celebra tion of twelve Vendidads, a ceremony described in the Rivayats as being like a great wind' which blows away all the 'sin of menstrua tion' (dāstān-wunāh). Is Perhaps because there were too few priests left to perform this long ceremony, perhaps because it had always been too costly for the villagers, I never heard it even spoken of; but it was not uncommon for an old woman to undergo no-swa, sometimes repeatedly, and to guard her ritual purity thereafter with the utmost strictness, rejoicing in being, for the first time since child hood, wholly and prolongedly 'clean'. Such women were sometimes then appointed the guardians of lesser shrines and played an active part in the religious life of the community.

The men accepted their women's ritual uncleanness as a trouble to all concerned, but an unavoidable evil of this life, to be stoically endured. Only a callow boy would sink to uttering taunts about it, although I once heard this done ("Yah! you can't go! you're un clean!'-a provocation which his exasperated sister, already grieved at having to forgo a longed-for pilgrimage, could not even answer in her condition with a well-merited clout). Even with the general acceptance by the community of the evils of this state, it remains a matter for admiration that the Zoroastrian women were not warped

14 The Sopra-ye Sabzi (see above, p. 62) was sometimes offered for such cases, but this girl was cured instead by a threefold performance of the Ceray-e no, another site carried out without priest or Avestan.

Ts Riv., Unvala, i. 219.15-17; Dhabhar, 221. Authorities vary slightly as to the dedications of the twelve services, but in general these are to be devoted to the Amahraspands of the seven creations, and the yazads of such other natural phenomena as the sun and moon, stars, wind, and rain. See Riv., Unvala, i. 211, 212, 219, 220; Dhabhar, 219–20.

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY

107 by a sense of physical degradation, but retained their dignity and self-respect. There were, of course, other aspects of the case. The enforced rest, especially when it was no longer spent in the ganza-e punidun, might be beneficial to health, as the priests maintained; and if each woman suffered a monthly eclipse, she also had each month a joyful re-emergence, freshly bathed and adorned, and with a con scious delight in the freedoms once more restored to her. There was, moreover, a pride in keeping the rules prescribed, for which responsi bility rested with the women themselves. The priests might speak of the 'sin' of menstruation, but the women knew that they were no more guilty of this than Eve's daughters of eating the apple. Rather, they were the hapless victims. But by observing the prescribed restrictions, they were not merely suffering passively, but were helping positively to restrict the infection of evil and to limit con tagion from the powers of darkness. They were thus combatants, with the dignity given by battle-service; more polluted, necessarily, than men, but also more greatly enduring.

The uncleannesses which we have so far considered come from the living body. All dead matter is also in varying degrees polluting, because death belongs to Ahriman, who brought it into the world. To start with the relatively trivial, what is shed or severed from the living body, that is, hair-trimmings and nail-parings, becomes at that instant dead, and therefore contaminating. Apart from specific Zoroastrian doctrine in this respect, there are also, evidently, some very ancient beliefs involved here, especially with regard to nail-parings, beliefs such as have been found among peoples the world over. Thus I was told by more than one person in Sharifabad and Mazra Kalantar that, if nail-parings were allowed to fall on the ground, they would be seized by demons and made into swords to slash their owner with in the hereafter. This ancient belief, which is recorded in the Pahlavi books, reinforces the doctrine that these parings are unclean and so must not be allowed to touch the good earth. The Sharifabadis looked with abhorrence at their Moslem neighbours when they shaved their beards or pared their nails casually in the lanes outside their houses; and they would not buy from a Moslem a cow or donkey with a halter on, for there was a firm conviction that such halters, made apparently from horse hair, were in fact plaited from the long hair of Moslem women, and So were utterly impure.

The Zoroastrians themselves gathered up and disposed of hair

108

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY trimmings and nail-parings with much care. 16 The method used in the Belivani household was to put them into a scrap of white cotton, laid on the ground at the centre of four kaš, or ritual furrows, drawn round it to pen in the contamination. The appropriate Avestan words were recited (Vd. 17.9), and then this cloth was sewn up, and dropped on to a little bit of coloured cloth, which was tied round it. Then one of the household (usually a woman or girl) would roll up the sleeve on her left arm tightly above the elbow, and holding the tiny bundle in her left hand, well away from her body, would carry it to the lard or nakhondān ("place for nails"), and drop it in. This was a small square mud-brick building, on the outskirts of the village, with a chimney-like hole in the flat roof, and steps leading up to this, but no door.17 One simply went on to the roof and dropped one's bundle in; and for the very old, for whom the steps were impossible, there was a little hole in a side wall. Periodically acid was dropped down the central hole to destroy what was inside, which till then had lain there without contaminating any of the creations (for the building was roughly paved). As for the bearer of the bundle, the Belivani custom, which seemed general in Sharifabad, was that she went straight home and made ablution, that is, had water poured over her from head to foot by a 'clean' person. In Mazras practice was in some respects simpler, in others more complicated. Thus nail parings and hair-trimmings were there put into a metal basin. No kaš were drawn, and the bowl was simply covered with a scrap of cloth, carried to the lard and emptied into it. Thereafter, however, the bearer made a threefold cleansing; that is, she set three stones on the ground, within kaš. Standing on the first she rubbed herself with pajow, on the second with sand, so that the pollution had been

16 This is the practice also among Shiri Moslems in some other parts of Iran (for instance, among conservative families in Isfahan and Shiraz), who also observed some of the ancient restrictions with regard to menstruation; but in the Yazdi area, presumably because of the continued confrontation of the two communities, there seemed to have been a deliberate rejection of such Zoro astrian rules. Thus I once, for example, saw a well-to-do Yazdi Moslem paring his nails beşide a cloth spread with food.

17 This building had been erected on his own land as a charitable act by one Jehangire Khosrow. Within living memory Sharifabad had had three lards, but this was because the land on which the two previous ones had stood had been bought by Moslems, and not because the little buildings were full. The largely self-sufficient village had earlier known nothing of packaging or novelty goods, and had produced extraordinarily little waste, and none which could not be destroyed by acid, although by the 1960s tinned foods and plastic wrappings had begun to make their way there.

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY

109 twice removed before she made ablution with water on the third stone. The metal bowl was likewise cleansed with pajow, then scoured with sand, and finally washed with water.

Already in 1964 it was only the elderly and the most strictly orthodox in the two villages who carried out all these observances, and younger women increasingly took the easier course of simply carrying the parings and trimmings out into the desert (which in Mazra lay all about the village). Since it was dry dead matter, it was not so noxious as fluid impurity, and if laid on barren ground would do no harm. Dry dead matter might in general be disposed of in this way, even when it was Ahrimanic in origin. Thus, for instance, during the great house-cleaning which precedes the festival of Panji, Piruza Belivani came across a glazed jar that proved to be full of desiccated black beetles. In her disgust she dropped it, and their bodies rolled out over the floor. Her thirteen-year-old sister, Bibi Gol, at once fetched the kitchen tongs and a piece of paper, put the beetles one by one on to the paper with the tongs, and then carried the little package out to a piece of waste ground. On her return she asked her youngest sister, Mandana, to tum on the tap of the water jar for her, so that she should not touch it herself, and very carefully washed her hands and the tongs. Pourandukht, watching, recalled a time when as a very small girl she had picked up a dead puppy by the tail to carry it out of the house, and her indignant mother had pounced on her, given her a scolding and made her make ablution at once. The proper procedure would have been to wrap a bit of cloth round her hand first, so as to avoid direct contact with the dead body.

In such cases the change from life to death was the vital factor-for a dog while alive was held to be the cleanest of all creatures, after a righteous human being, and small living insects were regarded with indifference. Otherwise life in a Persian village would be impossible. Flies settled thickly in summer even on consecrated food, and nothing could be done to prevent them, since this was set out in open pesgams. If, however, a dead fly should drop on food, this polluted it. This fact was brought home to me when I attended a ceremony at the dakhma, out in the desert. A bowl of milk had been carefully carried there for consecration, and just before the service began a fly was seen in it. The insect was bastily extracted with a metal spoon, and anxious looks were bent on it to see if it were still alive. For tunately it was, for otherwise the milk would have become impure, and could not have been blessed.

....

..

1

9

:41

110

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY Larger insects, such as big-bodied beetles, tarantulas, or the huge local wasps, were regarded as unclean in themselves, and it was a virtue to kill them, using Ahriman's own weapon of death to reduce his legions. Since they were impure when alive, they were only slightly more polluting dead. By the logical working out of this doctrine, the most polluting dead object in the whole world is the corpse of a righteous man, for he of all things belongs to Ohrmazd, and so, in order to overwhelm him with devil-created death, the powers of evil have to gather in force, and they remain about the body after the soul has left it, emanating an infective corruption. Zoroastrians treat the body of a co-religionist, therefore, with the same sort of care and precaution which others might take in handling the corpse of one who had died from a deadly contagion.

In Sharifabad most people died at home rather than in a hospital, and both family and neighbours were often necessarily involved. So with this and the many lesser causes of pollution in the world, means were needed to cleanse away the impurities which none could wholly avoid. The simplest of these means we have already en countered, namely outward cleansing through ablution, and inward cleansing through drinking nirang. There was also the more elaborate form of outward cleansing when a polluted person used first pajow and then sand before washing with water, and this threefold cleans ing was elaborated in the two major purification rites, both of which should be administered to the unclean person by a priest.

One of these rites was si-šūy or the 'thirty washings* (in Dari ST-šūz).18 In this the priest first gave nirang to the person to be cleansed, and made him recite the appropriate Avesta. Then he gave him pajow to rub over his body nine times, sand nine times, and water nine times, making twenty-seven cleansings in all, before a final triple ablution with water concluded the thirty washings. During the twenty-seven cleansings the candidate moved, naked and in a squatting position, from one set of stones to another, from north (the direction of Hell) to south, his impurity diminishing steadily as he went. The stones themselves were enclosed by ritually drawn lines or kaš, which penned the contamination in. The priest in his purity stood. outside these lines, and passed the unclean person the pajow, sand, and water in a ladle fixed on the end of a bamboo cane with nine knots in it; and even so he was careful not to touch him with the ladle, but poured its contents into his cupped hands from above.

18 On this rite see further Boyce, History, i. 312-13, with nn.

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY

111 The rite of si-šuy was still often carried out in the 1960s, and I once watched D. Khodadad draw the lines for it, and set out the stones, on a roof-top in Mazra. Kalantar.19 The purification itself, which was undergone fasting, took about half an hour. It was mostly administered to women (after an early miscarriage or other cause of impurity), and in that case another woman who had undergone no-šwa handed the candidate the pajow, sand and water, while the priest recited the Avestan close by. I met women in Yazd and the villages who said that they had undergone the rite more often than they could remember. Among men it was chiefly the salars who made use of this purification. They were supposed to go through it as often as possible (in the intervals of taking no-šwa), in order to keep down the level of contamination in their bodies. In their case a layman handed them the cleansing materials in place of the priest, who could not in his purity come so closely into contact (even when ritually pro tected) with ones thus impure. Occasionally other men asked for si-šuy also. I met one in Mazra who had undergone it in 1963, in order, he said, to rid himself of a long run of misfortune. In his case the purpose of the rite was thus semi-magical; but this was not doctrinally improper, since for orthodox Zoroastrians ill luck, like uncleanness, has a diabolical origin, and there is no logical reason why both should not be got rid of by a single process of driving off the evil powers.

The greatest of the purification rituals, which was much more widely undergone, was the barašnom-e no-šwa, or ‘ablution of the nine nights', referred to simply as no-šwa or ‘nine nights', for what distinguished this radically from si-šuy was that the initial, relatively short, purification on the stones' was followed by nine nights in retreat, during which the process of purification was continued under a strict religious discipline,20 In India this rite had by the late nineteenth century become one almost solely for priests, 21 but in the

19 For the proper layout of these furrows see Riv., Uovala, i. 600. The furrows were still drawn in this way in Kerman in the 1960s, where it was rare to find anyone but the priests and very old women who had undergone no-swa. In Yazd, however, where no-swa was still regularly administered, a confusion had arisen, and the priests drew for the si-suy the more elaborate furrows proper to the major purification, see below, p. 129.

20 For the extensive literature on this rite see Boyce, History, i. 313 n, 112.

21 See J. J. Modi, The Persian Farzial-Nameh ... of Dástur Dārāb Pahlan, p. 16 8, 2: ... up to about 50 years ago it was not rare to see persons, both male and female, themselves going through the ceremony... But, zow-a-days... the priests are paid to take Bareshoûns on behalf of other persons. The move to exclude the laity from the rite seems to have beguo among the priests of Bombay in the eighteenth century.112

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY Irani community until the beginning of the twentieth century it seems to have been undergone at least once in a lifetime by almost everyone who could afford it, either personally or by proxy, for the doctrine had been evolved that every human being is polluted from the womb, and so must cleanse himself by barašnom. The common expression for this obligatory observance was to undergo the rite 'in order to cleanse one's bones'. According to one Zoroastrian work,22 if a man has not been thus purified during his lifetime, the divine beings cannot bring themselves to approach his departed spirit, and he must wait to go to the Judgement Seat until his son or heir (pol-guzār) undergoes the cleansing for him, or pays a priest to do so.

The priests recognized four categories of candidates for no-swa: firstly, children, from the age of ten, who were sar-e šīr, that is, innocent except from the impurities of birth and their mother's milk (which according to ancient physiology comes from her blood); secondly, the adult and ordinarily sinful or contaminated; thirdly, the heavily polluted (rimani), notably the salars or corpse-bearers, who should undergo no-swa as often as possible, and at least every second year. They 'went on the stones' separately, and passed their retreat in a place apart. Fourthly, there were those suffering from a single severe contamination, who underwent no-šwa-e pajowi, in which all ablutions, even those ordinarily performed with water, were made with pajow. This was a costly and arduous form of the rite, for the ammonia in the pajow, remaining on the skin for nine days, stung and caused irritation. In Sharifabad it was undergone in recent years by a woman for her dead daughter, who had been burned to death while bi-namaz-a most unhappy fate, for in thus losing her life she doubly contaminated the fire (not only with a dead body, but with one that was unclean even before death), and so burdened her soul with great sin.

Up to the 1950s, no-šwa was administered to all Zoroastrians of the region in the city of Yazd itself, which had a place in the Mahalle-ye Dasturan built for this purpose, called the barašnom gāh.23 This was set within a precinct enclosed by a high blank wall. A door in this wall opened from the lane into a small yard. On the other side of the yard there was a little doorway into a crooked passage, which led to the secluded barašnom-gah itself. This was a flat

22 Saddar Bundehesh (ed. Dhabhar), ch. 72. 23 On this see Jackson, Persia past and present, 383.

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY

113 enclosure which, like a dakhma, was perfectly round, and for the same reason, namely that there should be no corners to hold pollution. There were recesses in the encircling wall in which candi dates could put their clothes, but when the site was not being ad ministered there was nothing to see in the barašnom-gah but dusty trodden earth and scattered stones. There were two smaller en closures within the precinct where the grossly impure (usually salars and women who had miscarried), 'went on the stones'. Barašnom was not administered during winter, for falling rain or snow would vitiate the site, and most candidates chose to come during high summer. An especially popular time was just before the great festival of All Souls, celebrated currently in late July, for not only was the weather then warm, but there was an abundance of ritually pure food. This was helpful, since each no-šwe (as the candidate who completed the purification was called) was required to increase his merit by maintaining the ritual purity which he had attained for a minimum of forty days.

The prolonged rite of no-šwa is naturally a relatively costly one, and probably in the past few villagers could afford it for their children. Generally it was something to be planned and saved for, and, unless a particular reason arose, it was not undergone until adult life, when it was an event to rejoice in and commemorate. So some of the small brass bowls (jam) which were used for festive occasions bore inscriptions such as the following: “The owner (is) Jehangir-e Khodabakhsh-e Isfandiyar of Mazra Kalantar. We became no-šwe in Anno Yazdegirdi 1295' ('sāheb Jehängir-e Khodā bakhsh-e Isfandiyār-e Mazrat Kalāntarī. 1295 Yazdegirdi no šwe budīm'). Leading villagers, however, like the merchants of Yazd, would sometimes send their children to become no-šwe soon after they had been invested with the sacred cord; and Agha Rustam himself underwent the purification at the age of twelve, riding into Yazd on donkey-back with a group of older people in the summer of 1932. When they reached the city (a twelve-hour journey) they found that with the others who had gathered there to undergo the rite they were a company of forty persons; and since forty is an auspicious number in Persia, they rejoiced at this.

There was a portico within the precincts of the barašnom-gah where the priests of the city would gather (those who were not themselves administering the rite), together with relatives and friends of the candidates. Here after undergoing the barašnom the

82953LK

114

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY candidates would come one by one, in their ritual cleanliness, and their kinsfolk would felicitate them and give them sprays of myrtle and cypress (laying these on the ground at their feet, since the no-swe must have no direct physical contact with others once the rite has begun). When all the candidates had assembled, they went in a body to the house of the priest who was to be in charge of the retreat. Sometimes night had already fallen, and they could go with out precaution through the empty lanes. If it were still day, someone would be sent ahead to see that there were no Moslems about in the Mahalle-ye Dasturan, for an encounter with an unbeliever would nullify the purification. The priests' houses in those prosperous years were often fine buildings, well able to accommodate large groups of candidates; and usually members of the priest's own family would act as 'parestārs' of the candidates, that is, they would prepare their food and attend upon them generally. Only the salars, in their pro fessional impurity, made their retreat in some house not ordinarily occupied, where they would have lay parestars. The parestars must always themselves be no-swe, however, and in a state of ritual cleanliness.

The rules for the nine nights' retreat were rigorous. The basic purpose was to continue the process of purification begun 'on the stones, and strict cleanliness, ritual and actual, was sought for throughout this time. Each candidate must bring with him two sets of spotlessly clean garments. One, which he put on after the barašnom, was of ordinary character, to be worn for sleeping and through the day. The other set was to be worn only for the nearly sacramental act of eating. These clothes must be white, and consisted, for men and women alike, of a headkerchief, sedra, outer shirt, trousers, and shoes of heavy woven cotton. They were all made of kerbas, the coarse un dyed cloth wover at home; and when old people went through the ritual they often wore what they intended to be their death clothes (for a corpse is clad in just such garments, which must be used, not new).24

For eating, the hands must be covered, for additional purity, and this was usually done by drawing over them white cotton bags, tied at the wrist.25 Till some forty years ago all Yazdis, rich and poor,

2+ See Pl. Ia.

25 This is a practice which the Irani dasturs required also of women who were bi-namaz (see Riv., Unvala, i. 212,8-10; Dhabhar, 222); but this appears to be one of the observances transferred to bi-namazi from no-swa, for it was not prac tised among the Parsis. Unlike that of the triple ablution, it failed to establish itself among the Iranis themselves, and was not observed in the twentieth century.

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY

115 Moslem and Zoroastrian, ate customarily with hands; but the ritual of no-šwa required an implement to be used. This was usually a deep-bowled copper spoon, often an heirloom, with its first owner's name engraved along the handle. Each candidate must also bring a copper bowl to eat from, and these too were often inscribed. If the candidate left the bowl on the floor while eating, then only the right hand that held the spoon need be gloved; but if he took the bowl up in his left hand, he needed two gloves. Before he ate, he had to say an Avestan prayer, and he must eat in silence, not letting the spoon touch his lips, but dropping the food into his mouth. Should the spoon touch his lips or teeth, he must throw it aside, and sign to the parestar to fetch him another. In no circumstances might he speak until he had recited the Avesta for after eating. Similarly, when he drank he should not let the bowl touch his lips. If he needed to drink between meals, when ordinarily clad, the parestar must hold the bowl for him, pouring the water into his mouth. The reasons for these various regulations were twofold: on the one hand, a desire to show all possible respect for the creations of water and plants, as represented in food; on the other, a wish to prevent the clean outer body becoming unclean through contact with the impure saliva.

The food given to the candidates must be plain and simple, and less in quantity than ordinary diet—a bare sufficiency for each person according to his needs. Meat must not be eaten for the . first three days, and candidates sometimes chose to forgo it for the whole time. Nor might anything be eaten which had been prepared by non-Zoroastrians. Bread (baked by the parestars from home grown wheat), fruit, herbs, and vegetable-broths were the staples of diet. Loaf-sugar was forbidden, and formerly only such things as dried mulberries or raisins could be used for sweetening; but later beet-sugar was allowed, since this could be refined by the Zoroastrians themselves. Tea too was formerly forbidden, and Mobed Rashid Rustami of Kerman told me that during the twenty-seven days of a threefold no-šwa (obligatory on Kermanis before they were ad mitted to the priesthood), he drank only water and milk taken from the cow by his own parestar. The prohibition against tea had since been relaxed, but the water with which it was made, and all drinking water, had to be especially pure. Smoking (which is never approved

of) and snuff-taking were both forbidden during the retreat.

The candidates must not leave the house of the retreat (the

PY!

116

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY no-swa-khāna), or engage in any sort of work within it. They must not set an unshod foot to ground, or touch another person, or even let their clothes come in contact with another. By day each sat upon his own čādor or sheet of cotton cloth (which must be spread upon stones or bare earth or a mud floor, never upon porous brick). By night he slept upon this same thin cloth, with another drawn over him, but no quilt or pillow. Nor should he sleep much, for this is an indulgence. Men especially were urged to curtail sleep, and particu larly during the first three nights; for a night ejaculation then an nulled the no-šwa, and the candidate must depart. If the first three nights had passed, however, he might 'go on the stones' again, and start the nine nights once more from the beginning. Similarly, should a woman begin her menses during the first three days, her no-swa became invalid; but if during the latter six days, she too might repeat the ritual, but after going on the stones' again she must sit in a place apart, so that her gaze did not fall upon others. That a woman should be allowed to complete the ritual in this condition is a puzzling concession, for she should be 'without prayer, and the recitation of Avesta is an important part of no-šwa; but possibly this concession reflects the usages of more ancient times, before restrictions on women during their periods grew to be so harsh and rigid.26

During the nine days the basic obligatory prayers were to be recited by all: the košti-prayers repeatedly, with those for the five watches of the day, and the prayers for before and after eating and answering a call of nature. It was good to recite a great deal of other Avesta also, and to read prayers in Persian, and especially, daily, to say a patēt or confession of sins. Some of the older women could not read, and knew little Avesta by heart, and they observed the times of prayer by long repetitive recitations of the two most holy prayers, the Abuavar and Ašəm vohu. For this purpose they used rosaries, called *band-e Ahunvar', either of thirty-three beads (the number of the divinę beings) or a hundred and one (the number of the names of God). It was the duty of the parestar to instruct the ignorant about times of prayer, and to tell them the number of Ahunvars and Ašəm vohus to recite when the priest led the group in their devotions.

26 See above. D. 100 and 1. 8. It is possible that it was through this usage, which meant that ablutions were administered to a woman in the later stages of menstruation, that the practice developed requiring ablutions to be made throughout bi-namazi.

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY

117 The ritual of no-šwa included, besides the initial purification, three additional ablutions, two (on the fourth and seventh days) to be made at the same time of day as the barašnom itself, and the third just after sunrise on the morning of the tenth day. There were also four drinkings of nirang, one at sunrise on the second day (which followed the barašnom), the next two at sunrise on the fifth and eighth days, and the last one immediately after the final ablution. There was thus thorough inner and outer cleansing. The ablutions were performed with sweet water, in which a little consecrated water had been poured.27 After the second and third ablutions the candidate's clothes add the cotton cloth he sat and slept on were all washed, either by a woman who had undergone the purification herself, or by a young girl who had not yet become bi-namaz. New clothes for daily wear were brought by relatives, to be put on after the ablutions, and the white ones dried quickly in the summer sun. After answering a call of nature, a candidate had to wash his hands thrice with pajow, and rub them dry thrice with fine clean soil. Water should not be used for washing during no-fwa, except for the three prescribed ablutions.

Although the discipline of no-swa was severe, the atmosphere maintained was quietly and serenely cheerful. In the intervals of the day there was talk and pleasant companionship; visitors were allowed and once the three first rigorous days were past, these visitors might produce diversions with singing and music. In these and other ways the no-šwa house had some resemblance to a hospital, with its strict routine designed to serve a single aim-in its case the cure of infective impurity—but with permitted relaxations also. Among the Parsis the discipline of the rite is as strict, but there is less austerity. The candidate is permitted a comfortable mattress to sleep on, and the food supplied to him is often varied and delicious. The additional hardships of the Irani practice seem un-Zoroastrian, since those of the Good Religion should not seek mortification; but they may well have arisen through circumstances, since poverty made a plain diet necessary, and cotton sheets were easy to provide and keep spotlessly clean. The unavoidable austerities were given a special significance, however, and gladly embraced; for it came to be be lieved that the nine nights' retreat had been instituted in remembrance of Zoroaster's imprisonment (after he had been slandered to the

27 In general Sharifabad did not waste its scanty supply of sweet water on washing, but used brackish water for this.

is

.

118

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY still unconverted Kay Vištasp). So when the villagers slept uneasily and pillowless on the hard ground, they thought of their prophet lying without bedding on the floor of his cell, and the plain food was a reminder to them of his prison diet. There is no reference to such analogies in the Rivayats, nor any knowledge of them among the Parsis, so that the concept appears to be a recent one, shaped during the years of harsh endurance under Safavid and Qajar rule. Agha Rustam himself insisted that the parallelism was secondary, and should not be allowed to obscure the function of no-swa as a cite of purification,

The priests who administered no-šwa were naturally required to be themselves in the highest state of purity. Formerly there were several groups of them in Yazd, and in latter years there was a celebrated parestar, Parangis, daughter of D. Erdeshir Khodavendan, who was famed for her piety and knowledge of Avesta, and for being deeply conversant with the ritual. She had herself undergone the purification thrice, and she was much respected by the village women for her care in instructing them, as well as loved for her kindliness and cheerfulness of heart. Her death in 1962 dealt a blow to the administering of the rite in the city. The old barašnom gah had not been used after 1960, but the rite had continued else where on a smaller scale. In 1964 it was administered once more towards the end of August at Parangis's own old home, and among the five candidates was the blind Palamarz Rashidi of Sharifabad, who then became no-šwe for the twenty-eighth time, for the benefit of the soul of a departed citizen of Yazd.28

Some three weeks earlier Palamarz had undergone the purifica tion with a larger group in Sharifabad itself. The administration of the rite there dated back to about nine or ten years previously, when D. Khodadad yielded to the entreaty of some old people who had never become no-šwe and who were daunted by the journey into Yazd. He told me that he had had many heart-searchings, because he

28 Palamarz or Plamarz was the oldest brother of Paridun, and had lost his sight through an attack of measles when he was eight or nine. He had been carefully taught Avesta by D. Erdeshir-e Rustam (who was hušt-mobed of Sharifabad between D. Khodadad and his uncle, D. Bahram), and he knew by beart almost all the Khorda Avesta, together with the liturgies of the gahambar services, the many other Afrinagans with their dedications, and the whole of the Gatha Ahunavaiti, used at funerals and on other occasions. Because of his lay ancestry and his blindness he could not become a priest, but he dressed regularly in white, kept strict rules of purity, and fulfilled many minor priestly functions, being held in high esteem because of his piety and self-discipline.

119

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY felt himself inadequate, since with the multifarious duties of his scattered parish he could not keep himself in a state of the highest purity (being obliged, for instance, often to eat in the houses of laymen). Moreover, administering no-šwa is very exacting, for the priest should recite the long office of the Vendidad by night to help drive away the forces of evil, as well as being with the candidates by day. Formerly the administering priest had assistants to help him. Now D. Khodadad was asked to give the purification single-handed, while carrying on his ordinary parish work. However, after much reflection he decided better bread of barley than no bread', and so began to administer it on a small scale, with his wife Piruza, Agha Rustam's sister, acting as parestar. At first only people from his own parish came, and he used his own house in the traditional way) for the retreat. Then his aunt-by-marriage died, widow of the former hušt-mobed, D. Bahram, and she left their old do-pesgami house to the village. This, called 'the Dastur's House', was kept solely for religious purposes, and served thereafter, among other uses, for the nine nights' retreat.29 It had a little high-walled yard, with its longer side running north to south, where the candidates 'went on the stones'. Another small yard at the further end of the building had steps leading down to a qanat stream, so that the place was well adapted for ritual requirements. By 1964 people were coming from outside the parish, and D. Khodadad administered the purification to three groups of candidates before Panji, and was being entreated to give the rite again in the autumn. Among those who came some had become no-šwe before in the city of Yazd, and they assured me that (as one would expect with a priest so scrupulous as D. Khodadad) it was administered in exactly the same way in Sharifabad as there. Through the great kindness of D. Khodadad, and of those undergoing the purification, I was able to be with two groups of candidates in the Dastur's House, and having their permission I propose to describe fairly fully what I saw and learnt among them.

D. Khodadad began administering the rite early in July to three women (who did not wish to be in a crush of candidates) from Cham, Mobareke, and Tehran. They finished their retreat during the time of the annual pilgrimage to the shrine of Banu-Pars, and, returning from there, we met them when they had just concluded the rite and were about themselves to make a pilgrimage, in their

29 For a detailed description see 'Zoroastrian houses', 132.

120

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY state of purity, to Pir-e Hrišt. The day before, a group of fourteen men and women from Mazras, and one Sharifabadi, had joined them in the Dastur's House, having arranged their no-swa to finish during Panji-kasog, leaving them time thereafter to make preparation for the Greater All Souls' Feast, Panji-mas. We ourselves were ritually clean from our pilgrimage, and Piruza Belivani and I went at once to the Dastur's House. Piruza herself, although only seventeen, had already become no-šwe twice, both times at her uncle's house in Sharifabad, The first occasion, when she was twelve, was for the sake of an aunt who had died by her own hand, without ever under going barašnom. Piruza had then had to recite all the Avestan prayers twice over, once for herself to 'cleanse her bones', and once for the soul of the dead woman. She was chosen to do this, rather than her elder sister, because of a placidity in her nature, a contentment in sitting still, which made the restrictions of the retreat less irksome to her than to some. Two or three years later she had had to undergo the purification a second time to rid herself of pollution incurred through helping at a still-birth; and being thus twice no-šwe, she was often asked to do ritual cooking, when everything must be very pure.

We arrived at the Dastur's House about an hour before sunset, and found the candidates a little weary towards the close of a long, quiet day, but ready to greet us with all the courtesy of the Yazdi villager. This being their second day, they had mastered the impulse to shake hands, and once the verbal salutations were over we all sat down again, carefully apart, to talk until it was time for the evening meal. The candidates were divided between the two pesgams. One of these had a small wind-tower (a late addition to the old house), and since this was therefore cooler and pleasanter, it was assigned to the men. There were five of them, three elderly—the atašband of the Mazrac fire-temple, the guardian of the mountain shrine of Pir-e Sabz, whose name was Sam Khademi, and a farmer, Rustam-e Bahram, big, dignified, and taciturn. Of the other two, one, Rashid-e Khosrow, owned a small mill in Mazras. He was well versed in the basic Avestan texts, and often officiated there, with the dahmobed or the village schoolmaster, in "outer rituals. 30 One of his kinsmen had died a month before, and since only one of the salars could come, he had helped to carry the bier into the dakhma, and had therefore to undergo no-šwa in order to cleanse himself. The fifth of the group, Bahram-e Khodabakhsh Sami, was

30 Cf, above, p. 54.

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY

121 a vigorous man in his early thirties, who worked on a drilling-rig for a Tehrani firm of well-sinkers. At festival times he came home to Mazras, and had begun to help in the ritual killing of sacrificial sheep. He had therefore been persuaded by Agha Rustam to become no-swe to qualify himself properly for this. (The older sacrificer there, Jamshid Sami, had undergone the purification thrice to fit himself for the work.) Used to an energetic life, Bahram had faced with considerable reluctance the ordeal of nine days' enforced inactivity, and to strengthen his resolve his mother and other female relatives had joined him. The doyenne of the women candidates was, however, without doubt Piruza Sami, small, stout, serene, and gaily talkative, who was going through her sixth no-swa, having kept the purity of her fifth unbroken from the previous summer. Her husband and daughter were dead, her sons thriving in Tehran; but rather than join them there, she continued to live alone in the spacious family house at Mazras, observing the religious festivals and maintaining strict purity. Her hope was to become no-šwe seven times, and then to keep her purity thereafter to the end of her life.

Soon after we arrived, the candidates withdrew into side rooms to change into white for the evening meal. Their white clothes varied in a way which they would not have done in former times. Bahram-e Khodabakhsh, for instance, and two of the women who, like him, lived in Tehran, had clothes of fine factory-woven cotton and modern in style; and though the villagers were dressed in homespun cotton, Banu from Mazra was the only one to be clad wholly in the tradi-. tional way, with long trousers to the ankle, the sleeves of her upper garment reaching to the wrist, and her headkerchief covering every strand of hair; and even she wore plastic sandals, instead of cotton give, on her feet. 31 The other women, like the men, had shorter trousers for coolness, and less enveloping clothes in general. But they all had dignity as, white in the shadows of the pesgams, they took their places again, each on his or her separate folded cloth.

Their chief parestar was Piruza, D. Khodadad's wife, who had two helpers. One was Piruza-e Dinyar, wife of the atašband of Shah Varahram Ized, the other Jehangir Jamshidi, both of whom had themselves undergone the rite, Piruza twice, Jehangir three times. Both had been busy in the kitchen, and now Jehangir went round the pesgams distributing from a newly woven basket copper bowls, all shining softly from a burnishing with wood-ash. He put one before

31 See Pl. Da.122

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY each candidate, with a shining copper spoon in it. Then he carried round a big copper basin full of newly baked bread, broken into small bits, with which he filled the bottom of each bowi; and then a great saucepan, black outside with wood-smoke, from which Piruza ladled out a thick broth, made of onions browned in sesame seed oil, with home-ground flour and vegetables. When the bowls were filled, Piruza the Dastur's wife stood in front of the men, tall and straight as a grenadier in her red dress, and clearly and carefully recited the Avestan grace to be said before eating, 32 the men repeat ing it word by word after her. Then she crossed to the women's pesgam and recited it with them. The candidates then ate in silence, with slow and careful movements, made clumsy by the cotton bags drawn over their hands, and the need not to let the big spoons touch their lips or teeth. The parestars went round a second time with bread and broth, the candidates showing by signs if they wanted more. Then Jehangir gathered up the empty bowls to be washed in the stream that ran under the house, and the candidates withdrew to change from their white clothes. Water was given before sunset to any who were thirsty, but since they were then in ordinary clothes they could not touch the bowl themselves, and Piruza-e Dinyar held one to the lips of whoever wished to drink.33

As darkness fell, at about eight o'clock, the lamps were lit. There was a bright acetylene one in the women's pesgam, and the men came across to face it while they recited the prayers of the first night-watch, untying and retying the košti. The women mostly remained seated, reciting Avestan to their beads. Soon afterwards they withdrew to sleep in comparative coolness on the roof (where they might not go by day, for fear of seeing, or being seen by, Moslems). As it was only the third night, the men were discouraged from much sleeping, and they remained below, talking to one another to keep awake. Piruza the Dastur's wife went round, moreover, during the small hours with cane in hand, rousing those who slept too heavily. Even for a Yazdi villager, however, used at times to sleeping rough, the no-šwa house was not a place conducive to slumber. On the roof it was fairly cool, and the surface of plastered mud was more or less smooth under a cotton cloth; but there were mosquitoes, and towards morning the temperature dropped sharply, striking cold through the one thin covering which was allowed.

32 That is, the idă dar yazamaidē (see "Zoroastrian baj and drõn-I, 303). 33 See Pl. IIb.

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY

123 Down in the courtyard it was hot, and the small cobble-stones which paved the pesgam were uncomfortable in the extreme to lie on. The day's inactivity produced a weariness that did not lead to sleep; and during the small hours D. Khodadad recited part of the

pesgam, and from time to time there came a sharp ringing sound as he struck metal pestle against mortar. All in all the candidate did best to resign himself largely to wakefulness, finding what solace he could in meditation, and the glorious stars of a Persian night,

The next day, following the ordinary routine, they all rose before dawn while the sky was still dark, and the women came down from the roof. Led by the Dastur, the men recited the prayers of the second night-watch, and the women told their beads. Then there was a pause, during which each said what Avestan he chose, or was silent, until the stars paled and the sun rose behind the mountains. As its rays touched the roof they faced east, and recited the prayers of the first daylight watch, and some continued with the hymn

Bahram Yašt.

After this, they put on white clothes again and broke their fast with tea, made very sweet and spiced with pepper to counteract the 'cold' effect of the melons eaten in quantity at that time of year, Soon afterwards, bread and water-melon were served in small pieces in the shining copper bowls, and by eight o'clock they had changed back into their ordinary clothes, and the long quiet morning stretched ahead. Some talked, some dozed a little, some read Avesta,

aloud a long confessional text in archaic Persian, while two of the womea sat in front of him, listening intently.

The parestars meantime were very busy, for this was the fourth day, and the candidates had to make ablution in the early after noon. Moreover, exactly ten days remained to Panji-mas, and so a whole group of Sharifabadiş were beginning their no-šwa that even ing. Water for twenty-five ablutions (including the parestars' own) had therefore to be carried up the steep steps from the stream, and stood to warm in the sunshine (for the qanat water, even in mid summer, was cold enough to pierce the marrow, after its long under ground journey from the mountains). Ordinarily melon would have been served to the candidates half an hour before the midday meal, this being Yazdi custom; but because melon is a 'cold' food, this

-

124

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY was omitted before the ablutions, and the meal was eaten early instead-a hot broth of rice and vegetables. Two women had arrived early from Aliabad to join the new group of candidates, and they, being not yet bound by the no-swa restrictions, shared a bowl together. As soon as the candidates themselves had eaten and changed out of their white clothes, these were snatched away to be washed at the stream and dried in the midday sun. Two of D. Khodadad's young nieces, who were not yet subject to bl-namazi, did the washing, and his elder daughter Parizad spread the clothes out on the roof, snowy white against the blue of the sky. (The clothes in which each candidate had first 'gone on the stones' had already been washed, and were tied up in neat bundles ready to put on.)

The candidates then made their ablutions, in the second Havan Gah (for although it was late summer we were, according to the traditional calendar, in the twelfth month, Isfand, which is a 'winter' month without the noontide watch, Rapithwin). The ablutions took place in the same yard as the barašnom, where two sets of big stones, one for men and the other for women, had been placed at the southern end of the yard. Each candidate was first given one spoonful of pajow to rub over himself as he stood on the stones (for the second ablution there would be two, for the third, three). The water for the ablutions was brought in big glass stoppered jars, made at the village of Tejeng, near Nareke. These jars were charmingly irregular in shape and colour, and as they stood in the main yard, warming in the sun, they made a lovely gleaming row, dark green and pale green, cloudy blue and white. Once there had been fifteen of them, but breakages had reduced them to six, and they could not be replaced, for glass-making at Tejeng was ended, ousted by mass production.

For the men's ablutions, Piruza-e Dinyar carried the heavy jars to the door of the barašnom yard, and Jehangir took them from her and administered the rite; for the women's they reversed these roles. As each man went to the yard, his košti, cap, and shoes were taken from him to be washed at the stream, and the Dastur's younger daughter, six-year-old Ab-Nahir, ran busily to and fro carrying them. The shoes were brought back to him to step into as he left the stones, and the cap for him to put on (a little cool dampness is no hardship in a Yazdi summer), and the košti were hung over the door of the main courtyard. Each man as he emerged, clad in clean but crumpled clothes, took his cord and, facing the

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY

125

sun, tied it on again with the appropriate prayers. It was the same for the women, except that each of them had among her clean clothes a fresh head-veil to put on, and they tied the kosti before returning to the main yard. One of them, Banu, after reappearing, sat down and said Ahunvars to her whole rosary of a hundred and one beads, as the equivalent of a confessional. When all the candidates were back, their clean white clothes, tied up in the cotton cloths which they sat and slept on (which had also been washed), were tossed down to them from the roof, and by early afternoon their own exertions were over, and they were sitting peacefully in their cleanliness. The men were still unshaven, though, and irked by a three days' growth of beard; for shaving was forbidden during no-šwa, since hair cut from the body is polluting. (Until the present generation almost all Persian men wore beards.)

The labours of the day were by no means ended, however, for the Dastur and parestars, for in ones and twos the new candidates were arriving. Like the group from Mazra', they varied considerably in age and motive. One of the earliest to appear was Rustam-e Turk-e Khodarahm, a seventeen-year-old who was studying at the grammar school at Ardekan, and had made up his mind independently to perform this religious duty during the summer holidays. For all his youth, he was unfailingly dignified and self-controlled, and bore the trials of the retreat without any outward fretting. He arrived, though, with some natural shyness in this unfamiliar place, whereas almost on his heels, in perfect contrast, came the centenarian Hajji Khodabakhsh, veteran of six previous no-šwas, who settled in with swift efficiency. He had a neat bundle with him tied in a cotton cloth. Glancing neither to right nor left, he undid the cloth, and took out a bowl and two spoons of gleaming copper, which he put in the recess behind him. Then he sat down cross legged upon the cloth, undid a second bundle containing his white clothes, and took out a little Avesta carefully wrapped in a purple kerchief. He retied the white clothes in their bundle, set them with his shoes beside him, and began to read aloud to himself from the Avesta. Young Rustam, seated next to him along the wall, looked reassured, I thought, by the little old man's calm procedures.

In addition to bringing his own few possessions, each candidate arrived with a contribution of flour for the bread-making, neatly tied in a white cloth. They all joined in buying firewood, and their families brought fruit and herbs during the nine days' retreat. This

126

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY was in addition to the charge for the rite of eighty tumans-a hundred in the city of Yazd (as against ten for the brief si-šuy). If a candidate were undergoing the purification on behalf of another person, the family would pay all expenses, and give him in addition thirty tumans for his pains.

Another veteran among the Sharifabad contingent was blind Palamarz Rashidi, who like the Hajji was becoming no-šwe vicari ously. The fourth man was a novice, like young Rustam, but with vastly more experience in living. This was Kay Khosrow-e Yadgar ("Kayok-e Yādok') who had left Sharifabad as a boy of thirteen, half a century before, to travel with a caravan from Yazd to Bandar Abbas, and thence by ship to India. Since then he had divided his life between that country and his Persian home, working turn and turn about with his brother, one tending their fields in Sharifabad while the other ran a chain of bakeries in India. He had travelled widely, and was alert, intelligent, and able. His busy life had kept him from the longer religious observances, but being in Persia during the relatively leisured days of high summer, he had chosen at last to become no-šwe in preference to making the pilgrimage to Banu-Pars,

The only Sharifabadi woman was Gulabi, stepmother of the khadem of Banu-Pars. She too had come to do no-šwa for another, and had a second client waiting for whom she hoped to repeat the rite in the autumn. She arrived looking worn and tired and shabby, after hard days of serving at the shrine during the pilgrimage, and she alone availed herself of the privilege which permits one who has already become no-šwe not to put on white clothes for eating, but simply to draw white cloths over the hands. Of the two Aliabadi women, both of whom were novices, one told me that she had suffered much illness and was in constant pain, and hoped that no-šwa would be beneficial. At the last moment Shehriar, D. Khodadad's fifteen-year-old son, added himself to the candidates, having resolved to become no-šwe before leaving for Bombay to attend a school for priests. This made the second group eight in number, so that there were twenty-three all told in the cramped old house, as well as the Dastur and parestars. From the crowded court yard and pesgams no leaf or blade of green was to be seen, nor any prospect but the bare earth of the yard and the dusty earth of the walls, framing the blue sky. Such had probably been the setting for thousands of no-šwas administered in Sharifabad in the past, before the priests moved away to Yazd.

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY

127 There was thus a fine variety among the full assembly of candi dates. Most of them, young and old, were undergoing the purifica tion for the first time, to 'cleanse their bones'; but Piruza Sami was performing an act of supererogation, in passing through it yet again on her own behalf, while Rashid Minuchihri was cleansing himself of a specific pollution. Finally a small group were taking the places of the vanishing priesthood, in that Bahram was seeking an especial purity in order to qualify himself for the priestly duty of sacrificing, and three others—Gulabi, Palamarz, and Hajji Khoda bakhsh—were undergoing the rite vicariously for the souls of the departed, a task which would formerly have been assigned to priests, as the 'cleanest members of the community. (In this regard it was an interesting fact that Hajji Khodabakhsh had worked for years as salar at the dakhma of Yazd; but he had long since cleansed his professional impurity through the barašnom, and, keeping the laws of purity strictly, was regarded by then as wholly fit to undergo the rite for another.)

The Sharifabadi group 'went on the stones' at about half-past five in the afternoon, Shehriar having not yet arrived, Rustam was accorded the privilege of going first (this was regular practice, the young being regarded, naturally, as less polluted). The stones had been standing some time in the sun, while the ritual lines were drawn round them, and, being as a schoolboy used to going shod, he said that he had nearly had the soles burnt off his feet. The little yard with its high walls held the heat, and after administering the barašnom to all five male candidates, D. Khodadad appeared hot and tired for a moment in the airier main yard, looking for all the world like a harassed surgeon, for he had stripped down to sedra and trousers, and wore the mouth-veil (like a surgeon's mask) up over his white cap.

After the briefest of pauses (for the day was nearing its close) he returned to re-draw the lines, reciting Avestan as he did so.34 The multiple lines were shallowly drawn, as little furrows, in the earth of the courtyard by means of a metal pin at the end of a long bamboo cane. They went, in complex patterns, round nine sets of five stones, interspersed with nine sets of three stones. The sets of five represented

34 If the candidates were all of one category, one drawing of the lines was valid for five persons, if all underwent the rite on the same day. The coming of night ended the efficacy of the lines. For the Avesta to be recited see Modi, CC, 121-2, (The Irani and Parsi administration of barašnom differs, however, in a number of small points of ritual.)

!

128

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY the nine holes in which in ancient times the candidate squatted to be cleansed, and those of three were there simply to prevent him having to place foot on the clean earth. D. Khodadad, explaining this, nevertheless attached a symbolism to the two sets of stones. The groups of five, he said, represented five evil things—lying, greed, lust, envy, and strife—and those of three, more generally, bad thoughts, words, and deeds; and all these faults the candidate should tread mentally underfoot as he moved from one set of stones to the next

The three women then went on the stones one after the other, and Gulabi, who was last, with great kindness let me be present in a corner of the little yard while she did so. Jacky the dog was already there, tethered by a chain which had been passed through a small millstone that held him firmly at about the middle of the east wall of the yard—that is, on the candidate's left. The rest of the chain, which was fastened at the other end to a pair of scissors, was long enough for the candidate to hold it as she passed over the stones, so that she had paivand with the dog throughout. 35 The first set of stones consisted of three big ones, for firmness, and two little ones, making up the prescribed number of five. Gulabi squatted naked on these (her sandals being snatched away as she stepped out of them, to be washed), her right hand on her head, her left holding the scissors against her left foot. Through the open yard-door came the sound of the Dastur's voice as he recited the Sroš Baj up to the words nomasčā yā ārmaitiš izāčā, at which he paused. Gulabi repeated these last four words after him, and Piruza-e Dinyar then poured the first spoonful of pajow into her right hand, from a spoon tied to a nine-knotted bamboo cane, standing herself outside the ritual lines. The pajow had a little nirang in it, and also a pinch of ash from the sacred fire.) Gulabi rubbed the liquid rapidly over her body in the way laid down in the Vendidad, 36 always the right side first, then the left, starting with the hair of her head, but not touching the soles of her feet, but instead rubbing one foot over the other (for it was held that the pollution was driven downwards and out through the soles of the feet, these becoming therefore too impure to touch). Parizad, as her father's deputy within the yard, then signed to her to move forward, and, still in a crouched position, she put her right foot on the next group of three stones, her left foot on

35 In this respect Parsi usage differs: see Modi, CC, 128 ff. 36 Vå. 9.15-26; see Modi, CC, 126-7.

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY

129 the second group of five stones, and then brought her right foot up to the left, holding the scissors on their chain all the time against her left foot. (Even for the villagers, with their suppleness of body, it was not easy to do this and maintain balance.) While she was on the second set of five stones, D. Khodadad recited the same Avestan, but this time twice, and Gulabi repeated the last words (nomasča ...) twice, before receiving two spoonfuls of pajow (each fetched by Piruza from the Dastur in the passage-way). Then she moved in the same way to the third set of five stones, with a threefold recita tion of the Avestan, and three spoonfuls of pajow. This brought her to the end of the first inner enclosure of ritual furrows (the outer ones went round all the stones).37 She then moved forward across the dividing furrows on to the fourth set of five stones, and the same ritual as in the first enclosure was repeated exactly in the second one, on the fourth, fifth, and sixth sets of five stones. After this double ritual of cleansing thrice with pajow and prayer, she moved on to the seventh set of five stones. This took her into the third enclosure, which (since the contamination was now greatly reduced) was more lightly enclosed, with fewer furrows. Here the same Avestan was repeated once, by priest and candidate, and then Piruza gave Gulabi twenty-one spoonfuls of fine dry sand, scooped from a little heap at the side of the yard,38 pouring some into her right hand, and some directly over her shoulders, so that she could dry herself thoroughly, She remained on this set of stones (Parizad having to sign imperiously to her to prevent her moving forward), and the Avestan was re peated, and she received from Piruza a spoonful of sweet water, from a vessel with a little consecrated water diffused in it. Then she moved forward, and the ritual was repeated as with the pajow, that is, with twofold Avestan and two spoonfuls of water on the eighth set of five stones, and threefold with three spoonfuls on the ninth set. Then she stepped on to the tenth set of five stones, put the scissors beneath her left foot, and stood up at last, turning back towards the left to face the dog.

On this tenth stone there was a final threefold ablution with water, that is, first the Avestan words were repeated with one and then with a second spoonful of water, and then Piruza brought a big

37 For plans of the ritual furrows see Riv., Unvala, i. 587 (where the stones within them are shown, however, in sets of 3-5-3, etc., instead of 5-3-5, etc.).

38 This sand, and the fine dry earth kept for use instead of water by the privy, had been fetched by young Gushtasp Belivani and the family cow.

130

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY glass flagon and poured its contents over Gulabi from head to foot in a generous stream. She then handed her her sedra, which Gulabi put on, right arm first, then left, over her wet body (the little yard was still warm enough to make this acceptable). She wrapped a white cotton cloth round her waist, put her head-veil, folded, on her head, and her košti over her right shoulder. Then, covering her right hand with a fold of the sedra, she grasped the ends of her košti and also the spoon on its nine-knotted cane, form ing paiyand thus with Piruza; and keeping her eyes on the dog (with whom too she had paivand through the chain), she recited after D. Khodadad the concluding words of the Sroš Baj, which thus framed the whole rite with its protective power. Then she said after him, thrice, the following words in Persian (with Avestan forms): Herbad pāk, sag ašā, pāk tan ašõi ravāne. tan-e fulan be-rasänād 'Pure the priest, righteous the dog, pure the body for the righteous soul. May it {i.e. the benefit of the rite) reach the person of so-and-so.' (Had Gulabi undergone the purification for herself, she would have said, instead of tan-e fulān, tan-e khwēšam, ‘my own person'.) Then she said thrice Hamazör hama ašā bēm, with a bow each time towards the dog, thus completing the whole ceremony. Piruza withdrew the knotted cane, and Gulabi stepped off the stones into her newly washed sandals, completed her dressing with newly washed garments, and left the yard. Since she was the last candidate, Piruza then stripped off her own clothes, and Parizad poured water over her in her tum, to cleanse her from any possible contamination.

When all was over, the dog Jacky was released from his chain and left to roam the empty yard for a while in the moonlight to help a final purification. The discarded clothes of the candidates were also left in a corner of the yard to be purified by moon and sun before being washed for use after the first ablution of the no-swa. The yard was regarded as dangerous for at least the next day, and anyone obliged to enter it kept as near the door as possible. (I myself sought unthinkingly to cross it to check a detail of the layout of the stones, and Piruza Belivani snatched me anxiously back.) On the second or third day the stones were raked together with a long-handled metal implement, and were sprinkled with pajow and sand before being left to the further action of sun and moon and wind.

It was nearly sunset by the time Gulabi had finished, and a supper of bread and water-melon was served at once. The Sharifabadi women did not have to change into white clothes for this, since they

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY

131 had neither slept nor answered a call of nature since making their ablution and putting on fresh garments. The next morning both groups had to drink nirang, and they all therefore put on their white clothes after reciting the prayers before dawn. Sunrise found them scattered about the yard and the pesgams, reading Avesta or reciting by heart, while the Dastur made his preparations. He very carefully washed, with sweet water, a small silver bowl and also two silver spoons (the smaller one being about the size of a dessert-spoon); and having filled the bowl with wood-ash, he placed it ready with the spoons and a small glass bottle of nirang. Had the candidates been fewer, they would have made a line facing east. As it was, the Dastur allowed them to stay where they were, to avoid the danger of brushing against one another, and as the sun rose over the mountains he began to administer the nirang, starting with the men. Before he did so his wife Piruza led them in the recital of the usual grace said before eating, and adjured them to keep silence. Each candidate remained sitting, and as the Dastur came to him, tilted back his head to receive the nirang. The Dastur poured the liquid carefully into the big spoon, and then from it, without spilling a drop, into the smaller one, from which he poured it into the candidate's mouth without touching his lips. Nevertheless, even though there had been no physical contact, between each administration he cleaned the bowl of the smaller spoon meticulously three times with the wood-ash. He took about half an hour to administer the rite to all the candidates and to the parestars, after which he washed the bowl and spoons again scrupulously before putting them away.

After a pause Jehangir distributed the copper eating-bowls and put fresh broken bread in them, and everyone was instructed to eat some, this being the necessary procedure after drinking nirang, so that the dry bread, almost a holy food in itself, should act as a barrier between it and other food. Since the evening meal had been a light one the night before (as it must be after barašnom), all meals were advanced that day, Water-meion was eaten at eight in the morning, and the main meal at half-past ten an excellent fried dish of rice and pumpkins. The open spaces were so crowded that Piruza Belivani and I ate in the kitchen with the parestars, sweat pouring down our faces. Baking bread and cooking over an open fire in these tiny windowless rooms, with their heat-retaining mud brick walls, was very exhausting in summer, and the work of the parestars was in every way heavy. From an hour before dawn to two132

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY or three hours after sunset they were busy, fetching water, kneading dough, baking bread, tending the oven and hearth fires, cooking meals, distributing food and water, washing up. (They were spared the drying of dishes, since in the clear desert air moisture evaporated almost instantly.) This was all in addition to carrying water and administering ablutions. It was, moreover, only for washing that the water of the stream under the Dastur's House was accounted 'clean', for there was another opening to it some fifty yards higher up, used by Moslems as well as Zoroastrians. All drinking-water had, there fore, to be fetched before dawn from a stream at the edge of the village fields. Jehangir used a gentle black bull as beast of burden for this, and they would arrive together daily at the door of the Dastur's House just as the stars were fading, the bull's panniers filled with big copper cans and smaller clay pitchers.

The candidates meantime, faced with two uneventful days, were reacting in their various ways. Among those from Mazras, Piruza Sami was as ever cheerful, and declared contentedly that they were in tanbal-khāna 'the house of laziness', with nothing to do but sleep and eat, and recite a little Avestan. Another woman agreed happily that they were like a stallful of well-tended sheep, eating what was put in their mangers without choice or care. But Bahram-e Khoda bakhsh, rubbing the black stubble on his chin, was frankly pining for an end to his captivity, and the fifteen-year-old Shehriar, on his first day, was restless and bored, saying that it was all right for 'old people who for him included Bahram), but intolerable for the young. The schoolboy Rustam remained quiet and stoical, however, and gradually the rhythm of the calm days had its effect on Shehriar also. It was generally agreed that for the young the first days were the worst. By contrast, the weary Gulabi was perfectly content to be still and rest.

On the evening of the second day four school-friends came to visit Rustam. Visitors were always welcome, if they observed the strict rules; but when the boys asked hopefully for a tambourine, the Dastur's wife was firm. A tambourine was for the ninth night only, for with it came singing and dancing, and a danger of people brushing against one another. There was no objection to gaiety as such, however; and often in the long morning hours one of the women would be coaxed to sing. Once too the spirit moved Hajji Khoda bakhsh, who had many of the instincts of a dervish, 19 and for half

39 His title of 'Hajji' was indeed eamed by his having made the pilgrimage to

133

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY an hour he paced to and fro in the courtyard, chanting verses from the Shahname very movingly in his harsh old voice. Another day Palamarzand Rashid-e Khosrow sang odes of Hafez, alternating with one another in two sweet tenors. There was also reading aloud from a great collection of the Rivayats which Agha Rustam had lent for the occasion, 49 and sometimes one of the men would read prayers in Persian, or one of the long confessional texts. Sometimes too there was just talk and teasing and laughter. No one might touch another, but it was permitted to roll a dastambul at a sleeper to wake him. These were pretty little sweet-smelling gourds, striped red and yellow, which fitted deatly into the hand like a medieval pomander, and were grown solely for their fragrance. They ripened at that time of year, and a number were scattered about the wall recesses of the Dastur's House, so that their scent could be enjoyed.

The following day was again a strenuous one, for the Mazra group made their second ablution, and the Sharifabadis their first, so once more the parestars had much water to carry, and the house roof was covered with washed garments. With this day over, the Sharifabadis had in their turn completed the vital three initial days, and there was a slight relaxation in the air. That evening brought a cheerful throng of visitors for them, who sat about amiably without anything particular to say, very much like visitors to a hospital; and in the same way they had presents of fruit and herbs for the candidates, which were handed over to the parestars. Of fruits, only figs were rejected, because it was thought that their pitted skins made it impossible to wash them thoroughly enough. The Sharifabadis had discussed whether (as was permitted) they should club together to have a sheep killed for the fourth day, but like those from Mazra they decided against it. (If a sheep was killed during no-šwa, the head, feet, and pancreas had to be set aside, since these were ritually unclean. The rest of the carcass was seethed and the flesh eaten in small pieces. If meat were eaten, a little wine had to be drunk by all on the sixth day.)

The next day two visitors came in the morning from Hasanabad, Mecca, in Moslem guise; and it was one of the baffing features of the local Moslem-Zoroastrian relationships that the Ardekani Moslems, instead of killing him for this sacrilege, accorded him the title, with a kind of perverse pride in such local enterprise. (On the strength of Yazdi local feeling against the world, triumphing sometimes over communal antagonisms, see Napier Malcolm, A Persian Town, 53 i.)

40 That is, the Bombay edition of Manockji Rustamji Unvala.

..

...

.

134

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY one with a big basketful of fresh mint from his fields, which was eaten as a relish with bread. This was ninth day for the Mazra group, and they would be leaving early the next morning (the secondary tradition has it that Zoroaster was released from his captivity soon after dawn); so in the late afternoon someone came from Mazrat bringing the fresh clothes that they would put on after their final ablution. Ordinarily there would have been some merry making that evening, but because of the death in Mazrac within the month (which had obliged Rashid-e Khosrow to undergo the puri fication), this was muted. But Agha Rustam visited the Dastur's House with some others, and there was a telling of stories and a sense of quiet happiness and achievement. Even Bahram-e Khoda bakhsh had succumbed in the last two days to the disciplined rhythm of the rite, and he told Agha Rustam that he was glad he had persuaded him to come. Jehangir was meanwhile busy by lamplight in the dark kitchen, kneading dough for a big batch of bread; for bread had to be baked that night not only for the candidates to eat as usual, but also for all the Mazra group to take some home with them, so that they would have 'clean' food to eat in the interval before they could bake their own.

Their last day was the first of Panji-kasog, the 'lesser Panji'. They made their final ablution as soon as the sun had risen, and drank nirang, after which they were free to return to the world. All had fresh clothes on, and some new ones, and the women looked lovely in their prettiest, gayest garments. Even the men had bright new caps and shoes, and their beards by this time had grown impressively, so that they made a handsome group. As soon as their old clothes had been taken off for the ablution they were washed, for it would not do for them, cleanest of the clean as they were, to return home with anything sullied. Then a handful of green herbs from a Sharifabadi garden was handed to each, and they set off for the fire-temple where they prayed, and laid their herbs on the pillar altar in the outer hall, and were given sprays of the green myrtle which grew in the courtyard there.

From there they returned to the Dastur's House, receiving the congratulations of those they met in the lanes. (Several of the women stopped along the way at the house of Paridun Rashidi, to buy 'clean' sesame seed oil from him for cooking in the days ahead.) At the Dastur's House they had a substantial meal of rice pottage, and bread with herbs. They ate in silence, with covered heads,

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY

135 but were able now to break their own bread and put it in their mouths with their hands instead of using a spoon. Each candidate then collected his belongings (with a great deal of talk), and was given two big rounds of freshly baked bread to take home, clapped between which was a little bit of 'clean' dough with which to leaven their own next baking. (The bread was wrapped in the cloth in which each had originally brought his contribution of flour.) By nine o'clock all were ready and sitting on their bundles in expecta tion of a jeep that was to take them back over the desert to Mazras. In the old days there would have been donkeys, slower but more reliable; for the jeep developed a mechanical fault, which was not Tepaired until half-past ten; and as the driver was unwilling to risk his tyres on burning sand at that hour, they had to wait until the cool of the evening, which they did with true Persian patience. By chance it was the day when a big bus-load of Moslem pilgrims were setting off for Mashhad, and from the Dastur's House we could hear the long-drawn, cry through the lanes that summoned them to assemble at the village Hasaniya. Finally the jeep came, and the no-šwe poured eagerly out with their bundles, and new earthen warę pitchers for fetching clean water in, and glass bottles of “clean oil. The bundles went on the roof and somehow fourteen people and the driver went inside. As they were packing them selves in, a fine old Moslem, white-bearded and dignified, passed leading a donkey laden with the bundles of Mashhadi pilgrims, and courteous greetings were exchanged. The parestars waved the jeep away, swaying and bumping down the rough lane, and weat back into the Dastur's House, quiet and comparatively empty now. The Sharifabadis were sitting peacefully about, having performed their second ablution that afternoon, and two lovely blue jays flew over head in the light of the evening sun.

The next morning nirang was drunk according to the strict ritual, with all in a line across the courtyard, faciag the rising sun; and after this the remaining days went quietly by, in an atmosphere of sober and cheerful seriousness. On the last day, as the work was so much less, Jehangir withdrew to see to his fields, and the Dastur himself brought 'clean' water from the distant stream. (Fortunately his other parish duties had been light during July, though he had had to recite the Avesta for several death-ceremonies, and on the Sharif abadis' last night celebrated a gahambar-e toji at the fire-temple.) There were again visitors on this ninth night, but the rejoicing

136

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY was kept quiet, for fear that the sound of too much music would bring Moslem neighbours on to their roofs. (It was only that year that the dwellings next to the Dastur's House had passed into Moslemn hands.)

On the tenth day (which was the last but one of Panji-kasog) there was again the butterfly transformation of the candidates, especially of Gulabi. She had come work-worn, in workaday clothes; but now, after the nine days' retreat, relaxed and rested, she looked radiant in lovely new clothes provided by the family of the dead woman for whom she had undergone the rite. Hajji Khodabakhsh too was in new clothes from head to foot, and during the whole of Panji-mas the bright stripes of his red and white cap shone out in the gahambar assembles. Only Palamarz looked unchanged, clad as ever in priestly white, ascetic and withdrawn,

When the early morning ablutions were over, the Dastur per formed the sedra-pušun of two of his nieces (Pouran Belivapi and Parvin Rashidi), and they and the candidates then went together to the fire-temple in the early morning sunshine, carrying their bunches of greenery, and after praying there dispersed to their own homes, each with his spray of myrtle. There kinsfolk and friends came to congratulate them, bringing green-wrapped sugar-loaves, and the no-šwe dispensed sherbet, and there was a festive meal for the family, with singing and rejoicing.

There then followed the exacting duty, for the no-swe, of main taining his or her ritual purity without the help of parestar and priest. This should be done for a minimum of forty days; it was desirable to do it for four months and ten days, and it was a great merit to do it, like Piruza Sami, perpetually. The basic rules for maintaining purity were that only clean' food might be eaten (nothing, that is, that came from a non-Zoroastrian source, and none of the funclean' parts of an animal), and only clean water might be drunk, which meant that each day the no-šwe had to fetch his water at dawn from a distant stream. He must wash his hands scrupulously, up to the elbow, before eating, and must keep his own plate and drinking-vessel separate, and never touch anything prangin—that is, already tasted by someone else, or in any other way made less than perfectly pure. He must eat with covered head and in silence, having said an Avestan prayer, and must pray again after eating. He should not speak with Moslems, and especially not with Moslem women, who might be bi-namaz.

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY

137 It was especially difficult for any woman who was herself subject to bi-namazi to keep her no-šwa, for during her menses she must be fed with a spoon, and given water to drink, by someone else who was keeping her no-šwa. (Piruza Belivani had in fact done this for a friend who became bi-namaz for the first time four days after they had been through no-šwa together.) Many women—the majority, perhaps—therefore regarded no-swa as a rite for old age, a final purification only, and Sarvar went so far as to hold it wrong for a woman in her prime to undergo it, being an unclean vessel; but this was not orthodox,

Keeping no-šwa must always have been rigorous, but in the old days of isolated, largely self-sufficient Zoroastrian communities the difficulties were plainly less. Even in 1964 Piruza Sami said that she found it no trouble in lonely Mazras, except for fetching water. She, however, lived by herself. In a crowded household there were many added complications. In a village like Sharifabad, which was near the 'Arab' town of Ardekan, and had itself several small Moslem shops, these were increased. No shop-bought oil or fat might be used in cooking, no baker's bread, no butcher's meat; and once one had become used to such conveniences, it was a greater hardship to do without them. In Tehran the problems were immense, although there was one convenience there, in that tap-water had been declared 'clean' by the priests. Smoking (never approved of) was absolutely disallowed throughout this time. If one should break any of these rules, by drinking nirang as soon as possible one could prevent the no-šwa becoming invalid.

The difficulties being so great, most of the villagers contented themselves with maintaining their no-šwa for the minimal forty days, and then formally abandoned it. The ritual for this was to 'tie it to a tree'. The tree must be a sweet pomegranate; and the no-šwe, while reciting the Ahunvar, tied about its trunk a green or white thread, fastening it with seven knots. He had thus 'given' his no-šwa to the tree; and he himself should then eat a dish of the ritually unclean kalle-pače (broth made from a sheep's head and feet) as a symbol of his own return to ordinary living. In this final act there seemed to be the intention of conferring the benefit of one's purity on the tree itself, felt to be one of the worthiest objects of the physical creation. That this was understood to be its purpose was shown by the act of D. Khodadad's son Shehriar, who, too impatient to maintain his purity for more than a few days, excused himself for abandoning

..

...

.

....

.

:-

-

138

THE LAWS AND RITES OF PURITY it prematurely by explaining that he had given it to a pomegranate which had a sickly look, to help it thrive again. The rite thus demon strates the power which orthodox Zoroastrians attribute to the state of purity. .

By a parallel observance, similarly designed to allow time for a purification to permeate one's being, it was required that after drink ing nirang for the first time one should consume only "clean' food and drink for at least three days. On subsequent occasions, it was necessary only to avoid prangin food for this period. Piruza Belivani had already drunk nirang twenty-eight times by her eighteenth year, but her sister Pouran did so for the first time before her sedra pušun at the Dastur's House. So during the following days, in addi tion to all her usual hard work, she prepared her own food separately with great care. She had fetched 'clean' dough from the parestars at the Dastur's House, and with this she baked herself tiny batches of 'clean' bread. At dawn each day she fetched clean water in a little new earthenware pitcher, and when the family was eating meat stew, or dishes fried with bought vegetable fat, she kept to eggs, fruits, and herbs with her fresh bread. After two days, it was Panji mas, with abundant 'clean' food at every gahambar-meal, and so she was able without difficulty to maintain the purity of her first nirang for a full seven days.
