+++
title = "Tapas"

+++
(“heat”) Term denoting any physical  
**asceticism**, or what in earlier times was  
referred to as mortification of the flesh.  
The term *tapas* encompasses rites of  
denial, such as fasting (**upavasa**) or  
**celibacy**, as well as rites of enduring  
physical pain, such as the “five fires”  
(**panchagni**) rite. In this rite a person  
sits during the hot **season** surrounded  
by four fires, with the fifth fire being the  
sun overhead. Other rites include  
enduring cold from bathing (**snana**) in  
snow-fed rivers, and enduring any other  
sort of physical discomfort. The word  
*tapas* can also describe bizarre and even  
masochistic behaviors, such as remaining standing for years on end; keeping  
an arm upraised until the muscles atrophy, and it cannot be lowered; lying on  
beds of thorns and nails, and so forth.  
The governing assumption behind all of  
these practices is that they generate  
spiritual power (seen figuratively as  
“heat”) and that a person who generates  
and amasses enough of this power  
will gain supernormal powers or the  
ability to demand boons from the  
gods themselves. Even though many  
contemporary Hindus are skeptical of  
the more extreme practices and may  
dismiss them, there is still great cultural  
respect for **ascetic** self-control, and  
combined with the right personality,  
such practices can still confer considerable  
religious authority.  
In Hindu mythology **Indra**, king of  
the gods, pays close attention to those  
amassing such powers to protect himself from being replaced by someone  
more powerful. When an ascetic starts to  
amass enough power to displace him,  
Indra’s heavenly throne becomes hot  
through the “heat” generated by the  
tapas. Indra must search for the aspirant  
and defuse this power in one of two  
ways—either by giving the aspirant a  
boon, which in many cases is the reason  
for performing the tapas in the first  
place, or by sending a celestial nymph  
(**apsara**) to seduce the ascetic, whose  
power will be discharged along with his  
**semen**. This mythology reflects the  
basic Hindu belief that the starting point  
for ascetic power is celibacy, which conserves a man’s vital energies by conserving his semen.