+++
title = "Ahimsa"

+++
(“refraining from harm”) Ahimsa refers  
to the conscious commitment to  
refrain from harming other living  
beings, either directly or indirectly. The  
emphasis on ahimsa originated with  
the Jains, for whom all actions carry  
karmic consequences, but who also  
believe that the karmic consequences  
generated by intentional evil acts are  
far more severe than those from unintentional ones. Jain and Buddhist commitment to ahimsa brought it further  
into Indian society, and it has been an  
important feature of Hindu practice for  
well over two thousand years. In the  
**Yoga Sutras**, **Patanjali** mentions ahimsa as one of the restraints (**yama**) and  
thus recommends it as one of the basic  
foundations for religious life. This  
commitment to ahimsa is believed to  
be one of the major forces responsible  
for the decline of **animal sacrifice**,  
which was one of the most important  
types of religious practice as described  
in the **Vedas**, the oldest Hindu scriptures. Far more recently, in the twentieth century, ahimsa was one of the  
guiding principles of **Mohandas**  
**Gandhi** during the struggle for Indian  
independence. Although Gandhi did  
not rule out the use of violence in principle, his commitment to ahimsa  
reflected his judgment that means and  
ends are karmically linked, and that  
the means one employs will determine  
both the nature and tone of one’s ends.  
See also **karma**.  
18  
Ahimsa  
Temple to the goddess Durga in the city of Aihole.