+++
title = "११ परिकरविभागाधिकारः"

+++

॥ श्रीः ॥  
॥ श्रीमते निगमान्तमहादेशिकाय नमः ॥  
॥ श्रीमद्रहस्यत्रयसारे परिकरविभागाधिकारः ॥ ११ ॥

(11) THE CHAPTER ON THE CLASSIFICATION OF ACCESSORIES OR _AÑGA_S: page174

SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_:

इयानित्थंभूतस्सकृदयमवश्यंभवनवान्  
दयादिव्याम्भोधौ जगदखिलमन्तर्यमयति ।  
भवध्वंसोद्युक्ते भगवति भरन्यासवपुषः  
प्रपत्तेरादिष्टः परिकरविशेषः श्रुति मुखैः ॥ २६ ॥

_Prapatti_ to Bhagavān which is of the nature of _bharanyāsa_ (the surrender to the Lord of the responsibility of one's protection) is ordained in such _śāstra_s as the Vedas as having certain distinctive accessories or _aṅga_s, which are of a certain specific nature and of a certain specific extent and it is to be necessarily performed and only once to _Bhagavān_, who is the celestial ocean of mercy who controls the whole universe from within it and who is already bent on the destruction of _samsāra_.

THE _AÑGA_S OR ACCESSORIES OF _PRAPATTI_ :

The accessories or _aṅga_s of this _vidyā_ (nyāsavidyā or _prapatti_) are the following: the intention or will to do (thereafter) whatever is agreeable ( to the Lord), the avoidance of whatever is displeasing (to Him, helplessness (_kārpaṇya_), supreme faith, and supplication or seeking His protection.

It has (sometimes) been said that _śaraṇāgati_ is of six kinds : intention to do whatever is pleasing ( to the Lord) (ānukūlyasaṅkalpa), the avoidance of whatever is displeasing to Him (prātikūlyavarjanam), the faith that He will afford protection (mahāviśvāsa), begging His protection (goptṛtvavaraṇa), the surrender of the self (ātmanikṣepa) and the feeling of helplessness (_kārpaṇya_). It is stated to be six-fold in this and other passages by the inclusion of the aṅgī, namely _prapatti_ or self surrender among its _aṅga_s or accessories as in the word aṣṭā_ṅga_[^52] _yoga_.

[^52]: Aṣṭā_ṅga_ Yoga is really dhyānayoga. It is said to consist of yama, _niyama_, _āsana_, prāṇāyāma, pratyāhāra, dhyāna, dhāraṇa and samādhi, Samādhi which is the _aṅgī_ is included among its _aṅga_s or accessories  .

That one of these is angī and that the others are _aṅga_s are evident from the following _śloka_  and (this does not require any argument) :  “_Nyāsa_ or 'self-surrender which has the word _nikṣepa_ for a synonym has five _aṅga_s and is called also sannyāsa, tyāga and _śaraṇāgati_.” In the Ahirbudhnya Samhita, it is stated as follows:--- "The _prapatti_ that I perform to the Lord is itself eternal fruition to me: I desire no other fruit than this. This absence of the desire for any other fruit (than _prapatti_) is itself considered as the chief _aṅga_. The desire for the fruit is opposed to this." This other _aṅga_ (described in the Ahi. Samhita), namely, the absence of any desire for ulterior results or fruit is essential in the surrender of the self for the sake of _mokṣa_ , (and not in every form of _prapatti_). The giving up of all attachment to the fruit or consequence and also of the thought of one's doer- ship is common to all forms of renunciation such as _karma_ _yoga_, This thought or reflection should therefore be entertained by the person desirous of _mokṣa_ , at the time of his surrender of His self to the Lord with all the _aṅga_s.

1  2. ANUKÜLYA SANKALPA AND PRĀTIKūLYA VARJANAM:

Among these _aṅga_s, the essential condition for the will to do what is pleasing (to the Lord) (ānukülya _saṅkalpa_) and the avoidance of what would be displeasing to Him, (prātikulya. varjanam) is the knowledge that the person exists solely for the Lord of _Lakṣmī_ for whom all things and all beings exist and should therefore do whatever would please Him by performance and by abstention from performance. From this it follows: that by the determination to do whatever is pleasing and the other (the avoidance of whatever is displeasing) one would avoid transgressing the command of the Lord.

(3) KĀRPANYAM:

Karpanyam , or helplessness is meditation on one's _ākiñcanya_ and other attributes (like ananyagatitvam) described in the previous chapter, or the freedom from pride to which it gives rise. These generate a feeling of wretchedness or helplessness. In any one of these ways, it would serve to heighten the compassion of the Saviour (_śaraṇya_ ) and would be useful later on for the promotion of the knowledge that there is no other _upāya_. For it is said :- "Kārpanya is abstention from seeking any other _upāya_"

(4) MAHAVISVASA:

Supreme faith or mahāviśvāsa is necessary for the performance of _prapatti_ free from all doubts and it leads later on to freedom from all care or anxiety. For it is said. "From the faith that He will protect arises the performance of the desired _upāya_."

(5) GOPTṚTVA VARAṆAM :

Though _mokṣa_  is the appropriate goal of our essential nature, (_svarūpa_), yet when it is sought as the desired end (_puruṣārtha_), it has to be asked for, just like other desired objects not so appropriate. Supplication for protection is necessary since the thing (viz. _mokṣa_ ) would be given only to one who asks for it. No good thing is ever given without its being asked for. Therefore _mokṣa_  will not be _puruṣārtha_, unless it is asked for by the purusha. That is why it has been stated as follows :-"No protection would be given when it is not sought", and " Suppliancy or seeking the Lord as Saviour is to make our mind known (to Him)."

Since these five are of use at the time of the performance of _prapatti_, they are essential for the surrender of one's self, atma _nikṣepa_.

ILLUSTRATION OF THE PRESENCE OF THESE _AÑGA_S IN SARANĀGATI:

These _aṅga_s that are essential for _prapatti_ may be seen in the words of the good Trijata to the Rākṣasis advising them to seek refuge under Sītādevi. "Enough of your cruel words." This states the avoidance of what is displeasing. " Use only conciliatory language". This states implicitly the intention or will to do what is pleasing, since the utterance of speech is impossible without being preceded by mental resolution. “Terrible dread has, indeed, befallen the Rākṣasās from Rama." By describing the state of helplessness in which they stand, this shows their _ākiñcanya_ which is a qualification (for _prapatti_) and it reveals their _kārpaṇya_ also, for, by reflecting on their helplessness they would give up their arrogance and the like, which leads to _kārpaṇya_, one of the _aṅga_s." She is capable of protecting us, O Rākṣasis, from this great danger", which is elaborated by Hanuman into " She is  capable of protecting these Rākṣasis from Rama". This shows the great faith or mahavisvāsa that she will protect, for even when the Lord is intent on punishing one (for his or her mis-deeds ) she can turn his mind from anger. "Let us beg Sītā (to protect us). This is what I consider proper. Though you threatened her before, beg of her now; O Rākṣasis, do not ask whether she will protect. Sach talk is vain." This is supplication for protection. The surrender of the self, ātma _nikṣepa_, which is the _aṅgī_ and which has these five as ita _aṅga_s is intended in the word pranipāta (obeisance ) which states the cause that produces the graciousness, in the _śloka_ : "Sītā, the daughter of Janaka, is surely bent on showing her graciousness to those who do her obeisance". Therefore the statement in the sāstrās that _Nyāsa_ has five _aṅga_s' ' is seen in its completeness here (in the _prapatti_ of the Rākṣasis ). The Rākṣasis did not reject this advice and even this (mere) acquiescence (namely, non-rejection ) made Sītā become their refuge owing to her extreme love and graciously say:- "I will be your refuge." That these words were from the very heart and ultimately bore fruit has been declared by the great Parāśara Bhattar renowned for his learning and wisdom in the _śloka_ : “O Mother Maithili, by the protection which you gave to the offending Rākṣasis from Hanuman, you reduced Rama and His council (Sugrīva and others) to a lower position, (for Rama protected Vibhishana (who had committed no offence) and Kakasura (who had offended) when they were able to ask for protection whereas you protected the Rākṣasis while they were in the very act of offending, and even when they did not themselves beg of you to do so, (at the intercession of Trijata)," In this surrender, by Trijata, of the responsibility (for protection) of herself and of others connected with her, the Raksh asis who were related to Trijata by birth and who had won her affection, were included. So also the four Rākṣasas who came along with Vibhishana were included in the _upāya_ adopted by him. In that context also where protection was granted (by Rama ), it is possible to fit in the _aṅgī_ and the _aṅga_s. And it is in this way - Since (Vibhishana) tells Ravana who is determined to continue in his evil career, “Let "Sītā be given back to Rama", and "Let us give Sītā Devi to Rama and live here, O King, free from all anxiety," Vibhishana's intention to do whatever is pleasing (anukulya _saṅkalpa_ ) is disclosed. This wholesome speech caused anger in Ravana's mind in the same way as milk tastes bitter to the person suffering from (excess of) bile. The intention to avoid what is displeasing (prātikulya varjanam) is revealed in his coming (to ŚrīRama) having given up all attachment to Lanka in accordance with his words, "I seek refuge under Rama having given up (my) sons and wives", and "Lanka, friends, and all kinds of wealth have been abandoned by me," (These words were uttered by him) after Ravana cursed him saying: "Shame on thee, O thou that bringest disgrace to our race." He then came to the conclusion that there was no use of giving him advice any more, that he should not enjoy any further the glories of being with him and that he should not even stay in the place where he was. Vibhishana's karpanya or feeling of helplessness is stated in his words beginning with, “The wicked Ravana" and in his saying that he has no other course left open owing to his enmity with the all-conquering Ravana and in his declaring a short while after: "I am the younger brother of Ravana and have been put to disgrace by him; I have sought Thy protection, O Thou Saviour of all." His supreme faith (mahāvisvāsa) which made him approach without fear and say: "I have sought, as my refuge or _upāya_, Raghava who is the protector of the whole world " is indicated in the words “ Vibhishana who was great in wisdom" as being the cause (of this faith). The world "great " which qualifies " wisdom" is intended also to show his supreme faith; his supplication for protection (Goptritva _varaṇam_) is conveyed in the words, “I have sought Raghava ", for it is included within them. Besides the indirect suggestion of the supplication for protection, his speech, "Offer me ( Vibhishana) to him at once " shows the surrender of his self (atmanikshepa) done with the help of those who could promote this surrender (ghatake). The word Nivedayata, which here means "offer to Him" would be of no use, if it were interpreted as 'inform'.

These ideas can be found either briefly or at length in all other contexts of _prapatti_ and in all deposits of property on trust with others in ordinary life. When depositing, with a capable person, property or wealth which one is oneself unable to keep safe, has it not been seen that one intends to do what is pleasing and to give up the intention to displease that person ? One believes that the person ( so trusted ) can keep it safe and will do so if required, tells him of one's inability to take care of it and begs him to be its custodian. Then one leaves it with him and sleeps care-free, with.' out any fear and with one's arms on one's chest.

THE PRESENCE OF THESE _AṅGA_S AND

THE _AṅGĪ_ IN DVAYA:

It may be asked how these _aṅga_s are to be understood in the _mantra_ called _Dvaya_ which reveals the meaning of the action (_prapatti_) to be performed. The answer is as follows:--Doubts might arise whether the Lord of all (1) who is omniscient and omnipotent, (2) who rewards in proportion to the _karma_ (performed by one), (3) who does not require any help or assistance, (4) who does not take action immediately like minor deities and (5) who is destitute of equals and superiors-- (1) whether the Lord who is of such a nature could ( at all) be accessible to those who have committed unlimited transgressions (2) whether He would grant fruits beyond all measure to those who have committed unlimited transgressions which are hindrances to their attainment, (3) whether He would give (these blessings ) in return for insignificant actions (on the part of the persons concerned), (4) whether - he would grant them without delay and (5) whether He would be absolutely indifferent to the status of the suppliant. To remove these doubts one should know that the Lord has certain features like (1) helpful recommendation (purushakāra) from _Lakṣmī_, (2) the relationship of the Master to his servants, (3) attributes and qualities like love (to His creatures ). (4) the will or determination (to redeem them) and (5) His own satisfaction in saving them. These features of the _śeṣī_  (_Bhagavān_ ) which are needed, respectively, for the _upāya_ or means and for the attainment. lie imbedded, as it were, in the words _Śrī_mat (with Śrī or Lakṣmī ) and Nārāyaṇa  (the refuge of all men ) and these features will not, in reason, be available for salvation if there is no determination on the part of the _Jīva_   to do what is pleasing: (anukulya _saṅkalpa_) and the avoidance of what is displeasing · (prātikulya varjana). This should be considered as referred to in those two words in _Dvaya_. These words which show that the master has these features reveal by their appropriateness (the need for) the determination to perform what would please Him and the avoidance of what would cause displeasure.

These five, namely (helpful recommendation from _Śrī_, the relationship of the Master to His servants, His attributes and qualities, His activity in redeeming and the satisfaction (prayojana) He receives have, respectively, the following specific properties: (1) inability to refuse, (2) impossibility of dissociating (Himself from His servants), (3) the unconditioned Nature of His grace, (4) the absence of the need for accessory help and (5) His feeling that the gain of those who are below Him is His own gain. If it is asked how the doubts (about salvation by _prapatti_) stated before are removed by these specific properties, the answer is as follows:- (1) Though He is omniscient and omnipotent, He can not ignore recommendations of certain kinds and will pardon all faults which stand in the way of His accessibility in the same way as a king will pardon the faults of servants of the zenaną (on the recommendation of the royal ladies). He will appear as if he is unaware of these faults and be easily accessible. (2) Though He rewards in accordance with one's _karma_, he will become gracious owing to the performance of _prapatti_, which is something like an apology for greater things, a _vyāja_ or gesture, and grant even that fruit which is beyond all measure and which is one's natural right like an inheritance, on account of its being due to the relationship of master and servant. (3) Although He has all objects of desire and does not require any help or assistance, He looks upon the little action (_prapatti_) performed by one as if it were an act of supreme help to Him because of His supreme and unconditioned compassion; for He is like a generous emperor who is easily won over by even little tokens of homage. Thus he becomes grateful and acts

( accordingly). (4) Though He does not (in general) act quickly like inferior deities and rewards those who adopt other means laid down in the _Śāstra_s only after (some) delay, yet when a man who has no other protector or refuge has performed _prapatti_, He grants whatever is desired at the very time when it is wanted, as He did in the case of Kakasura and Vibhishana, by His mere will which is accompanied with generosity and which does not require any other help or aid. (5) Though He is destitute of equals and superiors, He has such attributes as independence and does what is desired by His dependants for His own satisfaction; so He grants (their request ) without any consideration of their status or rank as ( ŚrīRama did) in the case of all creatures in Kosala and in the same way as a man feeds his parrot and his child alike with milk. Thus the doubts (regarding the efficacy of _prapatti_ ) arising from analogy with everyday life are removed also by the same analogy. Therefore there is nothing to hinder _prapatti_ from being the _upāya_ for the desired object, as ordained in the _śāstra_s. Supreme faith or Mahāvisvāsa is not possible for one who has not understood, from the special grace of a good ācharya, these five, namely, helpful recommendation and the like, qualified by such attributes as have been mentioned before. This is how it happens: The man finds that he is unfit to adopt such _upāya_s as _karma_ _yoga_ and the like on account of his great sins resulting from _Iśvara_'s being unfavourably disposed towards him. His condition is such as is described in the following _śloka_ : "Shame on me that have neither purity, nor modesty, neither compassion nor shame; for, O Supreme Person, I desire to aspire to Thy service which even such great yogis, as _Brahma_, Rudra and Sanaka find far beyond the reach of their meditation." Thus he has a hankering for attaining an object that is hard to attain; but for securing it, he adopts an _upāya_ which does not involve physical strain, expenditure of money or length of time and which is easy of performance, since it involves only a single mental act or even a single utterance with only a general understanding of the meaning of the words as a whole. With this easy _upāya_ he desires to attain that supremely great object (namely, _mokṣa_  ) and that, too, when he wants it. He knows that, by birth, conduct and the like, be is unfit to enjoy that fruit, like a dog which is unfit to eat the offering made to the gods, and yet he longs to attain this glory not only for himself but also for those who are connected with him. Embar has, therefore, illustrated the difficulty of having such faith by saying that to expect this man who dreads _bhakti_yoga to have this supreme faith (regarding the efficacy of _prapatti_) is “to ask a man who pleads inability to pay a bundle of sesamum stalks which would yield a kalam of seeds to pay instead a kalam of oil".

In this connection Appullar stated that the man who, like the gopis, has little discrimination but knows that the Lord is easily accessible and who seeks Him as having this quality has greater faith than the man who thinks only of the Lord's supreme greatness and remoteness and avoids Him; for the latter is called in the Gita the worst of men (narādhama) as the birth of his knowledge has only led to his ruin. The greatness of this supreme faith born of a knowledge of such things as helpful recommendation (purushakāra) from Lakṣmī , the essential nature of this faith and the feeling of helplessness are to be seen respectively in the preposition pra in prapadye (in _Dvaya_ ), the root pad in prapadye occurring with the word s'aranam and in the first person singular in prapadye.

In Sarasāgati _Gadya_, Śrī _Rāmānuja_ explains the implication contained in the first person singular (prapadye) as meaning "I  have no other refuge". In _Dvaya_ the words Saranam prapadye express supreme faith in the Lord's protection. Therefore the supplication (or prayer for protection ) is implicit in the words which express supreme faith in the _upāya_ (though not actually stated in so many words ). It has been said " I am the abode of transgressions; I am without any other means of protecting myself, I have nothing else to attain than Thee." "Be pleased to be my _upāya_. This thought of prayer is called _śaraṇāgati_. Let it be performed to the Lord.” Further " this word s'aranam is employed to mean any one of the following : _upāya_, house and protector; here it means only _upāya_." The Lord of all, besides being the protector in the general sense, as stated in all _śāstra_s should, in the case of the _prapanna_, be thought of steadfastly as being an _upāya_, since he has accepted the responsibility of protecting him and stands therefore in the place of other _upāya_s. Besides, the Lord should be thought of as an _upāya_ in order that this adhikārī (namely, the _prapanna_) who has surrendered the responsibility for his protection to the Lord may remain steadfast without seeking other _upāya_s.

The word _upāya_ stands for "the means to secure an end" and this means may be either sentient or non-sentient. It has been said:-"Among the _aṅga_s to _prapatti_ are the faith that He will protect and the supplication or prayer for protection " " The Lord who controls everything, though He is omniscient and always compassionate expects a prayer for protection, since He has to look after the process of _samsāra_". Since the _upāya_ or means in this case is a sentient being (namely, the Lord), and the prayer for protection (or _goptṛtva_ varaṇam) which is applicable only to sentient beings is necessary here, the word saranam in _Dvaya_, which means _upāya_, implies also the prayer for protection. Since the word saranam cannot have two meanings when it is used only once, (we should understand that) in the _Dvaya_, the steadfast thought of the Lord being an _upāya_ which is peculiar to the adhikārī called _prapanna_ is brought out by the word saranam itself and that the prayer for protection which is common to all adhikārīs is understood by implication from the meaning.

<details open><summary>तमिऴ् - विश्वास-प्रस्तुतिः</summary>

अऱिवित्तनरन्बरैयम्बऱैयुमुबायमिल्लात्  
तुऱवित्तुनियिट्रुणैयाम् परनै वरिक्कुम् वगै  
उऱवित्तनैयिण्ड्रियॊत्तारॆन निण्ड्र वुम्बरै नाम्  
पिऱवित्तुयर् सॆगुवीरॆण्ड्रिरक्कुम् पिऴैयऱवे. (18 )
</details>

<details><summary>तमिऴ् - मूलम्</summary>

अऱिवित्तनरन्बरैयम्बऱैयुमुबायमिल्लात्  
तुऱवित्तुनियिट्रुणैयाम् परनै वरिक्कुम् वगै  
उऱवित्तनैयिण्ड्रियॊत्तारॆन निण्ड्र वुम्बरै नाम्  
पिऱवित्तुयर् सॆगुवीरॆण्ड्रिरक्कुम् पिऴैयऱवे. (18 )
</details>

Our kind _ācārya_ s have taught us the way of seeking, as an _upāya_, the Supreme Being who is (ever) ready to help us in our state of helplessness, when we are without such _upāya_s as _bhakti_ _yoga_ which give rise to doubts (concerning our ability to adopt them with success). They have taught it to us so well that we shall never commit the mistake of begging, for deliverance from the sorrows of _samsāra_, the (other) gods who are bound by _karma_ and are therefore like ourselves and who are not related in any way to us.

SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_:

प्रख्यातः पञ्चषाङ्गस्सकृदिति भगवच्छासनैरेष योग-

स्तत्र द्वाभ्यामपायाद्विरतिरनितरोपायतैकेन बोद्ध्या ।  
एकेन स्वान्तदार्ढ्यं निजभरविषयेऽन्येन तत्साध्यतेच्छा  
तत्त्वज्ञानप्रयुक्ता त्विह सपरिकरे तादधीन्यादिबुद्धिः ॥ २७ ॥

In the Scriptures (vouchsafed to us ) by _Bhagavān_ himself (e. in the Pancharātra Āgamas), this _yoga_ called _prapatti_ is proclaimed as having five or six _aṅga_s and as requiring to be performed only once. In this _yoga_, abstention from transgressions results from two of the _aṅga_s, namely, ânukulya _saṅkalpa_ and prātikulya varjana. It may be understood (also ) that from one _aṅga_, namely, karpanya, one feels that there is no other _upāya_. From supreme faith, another _aṅga_ arises: firmness of mind. By another _aṅga_, namely, _goptṛtva_ _varaṇam_, is generated the Lord's will to save. In this _yoga_, namely, _prapatti_, and also in its _aṅga_s, the thought that all these are dependent upon the Lord should arise from a knowledge of the truth (_tattva_) (that the _jīva_ is _śeṣa_ to the Lord and that all he does is really done by the Lord and that for His own purposes. sāttvika parityāga). This last thought is common to _prapatti_ and all other _upāya_s for securing _mokṣa_ , (When _śaraṇāgati_ is performed for the sake of worldly goods, this last thought, sāttvika parityāga is absent.)

इति श्रीकवितार्किकसिंहस्य सर्वतन्त्रस्वतन्त्रस्य  
श्रीमद्वेङ्कटनाथस्य वेदान्ताचार्यस्य कृतिषु  
श्रीमद्रहस्यत्रयसारे  
परिकरविभागाधिकार एकादशः ॥  
श्रीमते निगमान्तमहादेशिकाय नमः ॥

