+++
title = "Vishvamitra"

+++
In Hindu mythology, one of the Seven  
Sages whose names mark exogamous  
clan “lineages” (**gotra**; in exogamous  
clans, members marry outside their own  
clan); the others are **Gautama**,  
**Bharadvaja**, **Kashyapa**, **Bhrgu**, **Atri**,  
and **Vasishtha**. All **brahmins** are  
believed to be descended from these  
seven sages, with each family taking the  
name of its progenitor as its gotra name.  
In modern times, these gotra divisions  
are still important because marriage  
within the gotra is forbidden. After her  
marriage, the new bride adopts her husband’s gotra as part of her new identity.  
Vishvamitra is most famous for his  
long-standing feud with the sage  
Vasishtha, which causes numerous confrontations. The feud begins as a result  
of the difference in status between **kshatriyas** and brahmins. Vishvamitra is a  
king, who once stops with a host of  
retainers at the forest **ashram** of the  
brahmin Vasishtha. Upon asking for  
food, Vishvamitra is amazed at the  
ability of Vasishtha’s **cow**, the **Kamadhenu**, to provide food for everyone.  
Vishvamitra first tries to buy the  
Kamadhenu, then tries to take it by  
force, but his minions are defeated by  
the **magic** powers generated by  
Vasishtha’s **tapas** (**ascetic** practices).  
Vishvamitra finally admits defeat and  
begins to do ascetic practices to generate power of his own. Two of their most  
celebrated clashes are over King  
**Trishanku** and his **son**, **Harishchandra**;  
in each case the real issue is the mutual  
antipathy of these two sages. See also  
**marriage prohibitions**.