+++
title = "7 Mantric practices and the nature of mantric utterance"

+++
**1**





Most ancient Tantric texts, and some more recent ones too, contain a mixture of sometimes very elaborate theological and metaphysical notions with a mystical and soteriological aim, together with a variety of magical speculations and practices, these two categories of notions and actions forming two very largely overlapping areas rather than two separate ones. A coincidence that should not surprise us since rites are governed by rules, that is, by theoretical notions which give them their meaning. The Tantric initiate for whose benefit such texts were composed, the *sādhaka*, was normally not a *mumukṣu*, a seeker of liberation, but a *bubhukṣu*, a religious virtuoso \(to use Weber’s terminology\) intent on obtaining supernatural powers or rewards and for whom *mokṣa* was the Tantric liberation in life, *jīvanmukti*, with its accompanying *siddhis.* These texts thus never left aside entirely the quest for liberation, as appears for instance in the Trika system of *upāyas* expounded mainly in Abhinavagupta’s *Tantrāloka* \(TĀ\) on the basis of earlier Tantras such as the *Mālinivijayottara* \(MVT\) and the *Siddhayogeśvarīmata*. Considering the fundamental role of mantras both in the quest for liberation and in the acquisition and practice of powers, it is not surprising that in all these works mantras are described as effective in those two fields. The mantras used for these various purposes are sometimes different; but they may also be the same ones. I would like to consider briefly here a group of mantric practices used when magical effect are aimed at but which can also be used for other reasons – these two different sorts of purposes being admittedly not easy to distinguish.

I shall consider here a passage from the *Netratantra* \(NT\),2 a Śaiva text \(undatable, but surely not later than the tenth century AD\), which was commented upon by Kṣemarāja \(fl. *c*.1000–1050\), a disciple of Abhinavagupta, and was interpreted by him in the spirit of the non-dualistic Śaiva system of the Kashmirian exegesis of the Trika-Pratyabhijñā. The NT \(often called by Kṣemarāja Mr̥tyujitbhaṭṭāraka\) extols the ‘Eye’ \(*netra*\) of Śiva \(sometimes also called Amr̥teśvara or Amr̥teśa\) and especially the mantra of that deity, the *netramantra* \(also named *mr̥tyujit* or *amr̥teśvaramantra*\), the basic form of which is *Oṃ juṃ saḥ*. The text describes at length the mystical, yogic and ritual or magical uses of that sacred formula.

Chapter 18 of NT describes a ritual called *śrīyāga* thanks to which the ‘good *sādhaka*’ initiated in the *netramantra* will be able to oppose those who try to counteract the action of his mantra or to make it turn against him. This ‘countermagic’ practice is technically called *pratyaṇgirā, pratyaṅgirasa* or *pratyaṅgiratva*3. To make his own mantra irresistible, the *sādhaka* first submits it to the action of some ritual treatments, of which nine are enumerated.4 One may, however, the tantra adds \(*śl*. 9\), give the mantra eleven different forms ‘thanks to which the *sādhakas* will succeed’, that is, they will obtain what they are seeking. *śl.* 10b–12a list these forms:


*samputaṃ grathitaṃ grastaṃ samastaṃ ca vidarbhitam* /

*ākrantaṃ ca tathādyantaṃ garbhasthaṃ sarvatovr̥tam* /

*tathā yuktividarbhaṃ ca vidarbhagrathitam tathā* //

*ity ekadaśadhā mantrā niyuktāḥ siddhidāḥ smr̥tāḥ* /


Thus listed are eleven different ways of interlocking the *netramantra* with the name \(or designation\) of the person aimed at, or the action to be effected: the *nāma, abhidheya* or *sādhya.*

The grammar of the above list, given here as printed in the KSTS edition of the NT, is not satisfactory. It is clear, however, that it enumerates some things that are to be done to the mantra, and this is indeed how Kṣemarāja explains these terms in his Uddyota \(vol. 2, pp. 77–79\), confirming his point, in each case, with a quotation from an unspecified text, probably the *Ucchuṣmatantra*. His definitions coincide with those given for several of these terms in other Tantric works \(of which I have checked only a few\), the practices listed here being fairly common in magic, especially for the so-called *ṣaṭkarmāṇi*, the ‘six \[magical\] actions’ described in a number of Tantric texts whether Hindu or Buddhist.

Here are these eleven terms – and the corresponding practices:

*Saṃpuṭa*: the word means a bowl or a rounded casket, or the space enclosed inside these objects, or between two covers, etc. The mantra \(or any part thereof, or any element with which it is associated\) must be symbolically ‘encased’ inside such a space or casket, covered as with a lid or within two covers.5 Kṣemarāja defines it here as the placing of the mantra before and after the other element which is thus encased, as it were, within it: *ādyantayor mantranyāsaḥ sa saṃpuṭavaṭ* The pattern is thus B A B \(where A is the mantra and B the *nāma/abhidheya / sādhya*\). The same practice is prescribed in NT 6.18, which adds \(19\) that one may thus ‘encase’ any mantra within the *amr̥teśvaramantra* and, if it is thus recited, this mantra, whether or not intrinsically powerful, will immediately become efficacious \(NT, vol. 1, p. 131\). The technique of *saṃpuṭa* \(sometimes called *puṭa*\) may also be applied to parts of a mantra, an *akṣara* of which being thus encased between another one repeated twice \(cf. ŚT 7.52\), the sequence is then b1 a1 b1 b2 a2 b2, etc.

One may note that in NT 6.18–19 the technique of *saṃpuṭa* is prescribed for a *japa*, that is, is used orally; but in the *Uddyota* on NT 6.18 Kṣemarāja describes it as written: *mantram ādau likhet.* In the *Agnipurāṇa* \(AgP\), chapter 138, where *saṃpuṭa* is prescribed for the magical action of *vaśīkaraṇa* and *ākarṣaṇa*, it is described as the placing of the mantra around the *sādhya* – above, under and to its right and left: a spatial pattern, not an oral operation. The mantra, in this case, though theoretically a sound pattern, not a written series of letters, is mentally conceived as disposed in that way whilst it is uttered.

*grathita* this practice is also known as *grathana* – from the verbal root *GRATH* \(*GRANTH*\), to bind. It consists in binding together, as it were, the mantra and the *sādhya*, as in a knot, by alternating their syllables, ‘each syllable of the *abhidheya* being enclosed within those of the mantra’, according to the quotation made by Kṣemarāja: *abhidheyārṇam ekekaikaṃ mantravarṇaiḥ saṃpuṭīkr̥tam.* These words are also quoted by Jayaratha in his *Vivaraṇa* on the VM 2.35–6 \(or NṢV, 2.36–37, p. 157\),6 which prescribes the enclosing of each letter of the *sādhya* within the *bīja* of Kāmakalā \(*ĪṂ*\), this being done \(in writing\) on a diagram, around the border of which all the letters of the alphabet are to be inscribed.7 The AgP 138.6, the *Tantrarājatantra* \(TRT\)1.72, or the ĪŚGP 1.5 give the same definition of *grathana* as Kṣemarāja.

*grasta* the term means swallowed or eclipsed, but also surrounded. Its use, for a practice consisting \(according to Kṣemarāja\) in putting the name or *sādhya* in the middle, with the mantra written on all four sides \(*madhyasthasya nāmno dikcatuṣṭaye mantraniveśaḥ*\), appears thus wholly justified.8 This practice is in fact what the AgP 138 calls *saṃpuṭīkaraṇa.*

In its present sense *grasta* is not found in the AgP nor in the TRT, the ĪŚGP or the *Pheṭkariṇītantra* \(PheṭK\). This can be said of the following term also.

*samasta* the *nāman* is uttered or written before the mantra, this being done twice: B A B A. *Samasta* meaning ‘put together’, ‘united’, the term could apply to any other combination as well. *Samasta* like *grasta* seems proper to the NT.

*vidarbhitam* ‘first the name, then the mantra is *vidarbha*’, says Kṣemarāja, and he quotes: *abhidheyaṃ bhavet pūrvaṃ tato mantra sakr̥d bhavet / vidarbhitam.* The Pheṭ K 3.148–149 defines it differently as alternating the letters of the mantra and those of the *abhidheya*, the pattern being not B A, but b1 a2 b2 a3 b3, etc. The AgP 138.7 says that one should alternate two syllables of the mantra with one of the *sādhya* \(*mantrākṣaraṃ dvayam. likhyā sādhyākṣaram punaḥ*\): a1 a2 b1 a3 a4 b2 a5, and so forth.



The VMT 2.33–34 \(or NṢA 2.34–35\) prescribes this practice for an amulet where the letters of the mantra and *sādhya* are inscribed in a *śrīcakra*, a practice described differently by Śivānanda in his *R̥juvimarśinī* \(as: a1 b1 a2 b2 a3 b3 etc.\) and by Vidyānanda in the *Artharatnāvalī* \(a1 a2 b1 a3 a4 b2, etc.\). The same text \(ś*l.* 21–22\) prescribes a *nyāsa* of the *mūlamantra* on the image of the goddess entwined with the *aṇkuśabīja* \(*KROṂ*\).9 There are thus different forms of *vidarbha* in *japa* or in writing.10 Whatever its form, however, *vidarbha* always consists of associating *sādhya* and mantra while cutting apart somehow either these two elements, or the whole formula, or their constituting syllables.

But why is this called *vidarbha*? In this technical mantric sense, the term seems not to be found in Sanskrit dictionaries or encyclopaedias. Edgerton’s *Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Dictionary*, however, defines *vidarbhayati* \(with *vidarbhana* and *pravidarbha*\) as ‘intertwines \(letters\), i.e. writes them between letters of a mantra’, and it refers to several passages of the *Sādhanamālā*. As I have shown elsewhere,11 the term can be explained by reference to *darbha*, the grass of that name, which has a cutting edge. The *Śabdakalpadruma* says: ‘*darbhaḥ – dr̥ṇati vidārayati, dradalibhyāṃ bhaḥ*’, Unādisūtra 3.151, ‘*iti bhas*’, that is, it refers *darbha*, in the sense of the verbal root *DR̥*, ‘to cut’, and since *Unā* 3.151 says that after *DR̥* and *DAL* one must have *bha*, this results in *darbha.* The prefix *vi* would then add the notion of separation, mantra and *sādhya* being cut off and separated. *darbha* can also be linked with the root *DR̥BH*, to string or tie together, the practice of *vidarbha* being then understood as first separating \(*vi*\), then stringing together mantra and *sādhya.*

The following six mantric practices – together with *grasta* and *samasta* – are, I believe, found in the NT only.

*ākrantam* *madhyasthasya nāmno mantro yadi veṣṭanayā nyāsta ākrāntam*, says Kṣemarāja: ‘when the mantra is placed so as to surround the name which is in the centre, \[this is called\] seized or invaded’. This looks like a variant of what NT calls *grasta* and AgP *saṃpuṭīkaraṇa.* \(Note that the past participle *ākrānta* applies to the *nāman*, not to the mantra.\)

*ādyanta* *mantrād anantaraṃ nāma tatas trimantra ity ādyantam*, ‘the name after the mantra, then thrice the mantra, this is “before and after’’’. The sequence is thus A B A A A .The term is self-explanatory.

*garbhastha* *madhyasthasya mantrasya caturdikkaṃ sādhyanāmanyāso garbhasthatvam*, says Kṣemarāja. This is in fact AgP’s definition of *saṃpuṭa*, except that the *Uddyota* on NT mentions the four directions of space instead of the four sides of the written mantra. It is also the reversal of what is defined as *grasta*. Like the AgP’s *saṃpuṭa*, this can be done only in writing.

*sarvatovr̥ta* *mantrasya ādyantayoḥ sādhyanāmaniveśaḥ sarvatovr̥tam*, ‘the placing of the *sādhya* or name before and after the mantra is \[having it\] completely surrounded’. This is the reversal of what is called *saṃpuṭa* by the NT. The pattern is B A B.

*yuktividarbha* the text quoted by Kṣemarāja defines this as placing the *abhidheya* before the mantra and three times after it: B A B B B. It is the inversion of *ādyanta.* The reason why this practice is so called is not clear.

*vidarbhagrathita* it is repeating three times the mantra after the *nāman*: *nāmnaḥ paścāt trimantranāsyaḥ*: B A A A. The reason why it is so called is also unclear since neither knotting \(*grath*\) nor cutting \(*vidarbha*\) occur.



This list of eleven mantric practices of the NT is an unusual one both in that it is longer than the usual one of six12 linked each with one of the *ṣaṭkarmāṇi* \(which are not mentioned here\), and in that it does not include three of these more usual ones, namely *yoga, rodha* and *pallava*, about which a few words must now be said.

*yoga* is defined in the TRT, PheṭK and ĪŚGP as placing or uttering the *sādhya* before the mantra: *mantrādau nāmasaṃsthānaṃ yoga ityabhidhīyate* \(PheṭK 3.142\). The AgP’s technique is different: *adau mantra tataḥ sādhyomadhye sādhyaḥ punar manuḥ.* We have thus either B A or A B B A. In both cases there occurs a conjunction or union \(*yoga*\) of the mantra and of whatever word or formula is associated with it, such union being deemed to increase the power of the mantra.

*rodha* consists \(according to AgP 138.3–4 and PheṭK 2.144\) in placing the mantra before, in the middle of, and after the *sādhya* – A B \(A\) B A: *nāmnā ādyantamadhyeṣu mantraḥ syād rodhaḥ. rodha*, from the verbal root *RUDH*, is probably understood as the surrounding, investing, or blockading of the *sādhya* by the mantra. It is mentioned in the ĪŚGP, but not in the TRT.

*pallava* consists, according to the TRT or PheṭK, in putting first the mantra, then the *sādhya* \(A B\). The *sādhya* appears thus as a shoot or extension \(*pallava*\), as it were, of the mantra. The AgP has a different description – it seems to add the mantra both before and after: *ādau sādhyaṃ likhet pūrvam. cānte mantrasamanvitam.* The pattern would then be A B A.



I have described the foregoing mantric practices not so much because I find them intrinsically interesting, but because I believe they contribute to throw some light on the nature of mantras or of mantric utterance or, more generally, on the Tantric conceptions of the relationship between sound or word and image or writing.

These practices, indeed, concern mantras, that is, oral/aural formulas transmitted by word of mouth from master to disciple and put into practice through utterance or recitation \(*uccāra, japa*\) only. Mantras can also be enunciated silently \(*tūṣṇīm*\); such silent utterance \(where the utterer ‘restrains his voice’, *vācaṃ yacchati*\), and still more the inner and purely mental one \(*mānasa*\), being in fact considered as the highest and most meritorious ones: the mental utterance is the highest because the Absolute, the supreme godhead is silent. Silence is higher than the highest plane of the word \(*vāc*\) because it is its primal Source. The mantrin, in such case, evokes \(or perhaps fuses with\) a transcendent plane of *vāc* which, imperceptible, is present as its animating power in all uttered mantras.

But how is it, then, that this power can also be evoked, made present, when a mantra is written? First, the writing or the placing of a written formula is not mere writing but a ritual performance which can be fruitful insofar only as it uses, as it is permeated by, the power of *vāc*, of the Word which inhabits the, by nature oral, mantra thus written down. The written formula is thus \(deemed to be\) infused with the energy of the oral formula. This explains how and why written mantric practices can be prescribed in a work such as the NT whose *mūlamantra*, the *mr̥tyujit OṂ JUṂ SAḤ*, is in principle effective only when uttered. It explains too why such practices are endorsed by Kṣemarāja, that is, by one of the main exponents of the non-dualistic Kaśmirian brand of Śaivism, whose concept of mantra is directly issued from that of the *Śivasūtra* \(ŚS 2.1: *cittaṃ mantraḥ*\), the main commentary on which is Kṣemarāja’s *Vimarśinī*, a work where he states that the supreme Word \(*parā vāc*\) or Consciousness \(*saṃvit*\) is the true nature of mantras.

Another explanation, and one that fits with the doctrine of the Trika-based *pratyabhijñā*, is that mantras exist and function on different levels. Abhinavagupta thus said that by nature they ‘consist of discursive thought as well as pure consciousness’ \(*vikalpasaṃvidmayaḥ*\).13 In their functioning, too, they may well appear differently. They may be felt and used as pure consciousness \(*saṃvit*\) by the liberation seeker \(the *mumukṣu*\) – and still more by the liberated in life \(*jīvanmukta*\), and be also \(even simultaneously\) used audibly on the plane of discursive thought and of the gross form of the word \(*vaikharī*\); they can even be written by a mantrin, a *sādhaka*, performing *kāmya* rites \(which are in fact those which are the main concern of the NT\).

These uses may differ widely; they are, however, grounded in the same, fundamentally oral, conception of mantras. Just as magic is never entirely separate from religion, of whose concepts it is merely a profane use, so mantras, even in their lowest, magical uses, cannot be separated from their highest, purely oral ones. In fact, such lower uses of mantras are effective only insofar as all mantras are in essence the supreme Word, pure divine energy.14

Thus a text such as the NT may expound some written \(and in some respects magical\) uses of mantras whilst still upholding the essentially spiritual nature of these ritual formulas. Let us take also, for instance, the case of mantras or *bījas* placed in ritual diagrams \(*cakra, yantra* or *maṇḋala*\). These may be placed in the diagram by the rite of *nyāsa*, which is at the same time a bodily and oral and mental action.15 They can also be inscribed, written, there. Some texts assert explicitly the power, value or meaning of these written mantras. A typical instance is that of the *kāmakalā* as described in the *Yoginīhr̥daya* \(YH\), one of the basic texts of the Śrīvidyā tradition.16 A passage of this work \(YH 2.21, *Dīpikā*, pp. 130–131\) describes – rather cryptically – the so-called *kāmakalācakra* as made up of two intersecting triangles with the *bīja ĪṂ* inscribed in the central part of the *cakra.*17 This *bīja* is to be meditated both as the *vācaka* of the goddess and as the *kunḋalinī* \(coiled like the letter *Ī* in nāgarī script\) in her ascent from *mūlādhāra* to *brahmarandhra*: the ritual process involved here is both visual and mental, resting as it does on the meditation of a ‘written sound’. The *Ī* of the *kāmakalā* can also be meditated as made up of three dots, that is, as it is written in the Brāhmī script: this use of an ancient script is perhaps a case of deliberate archaism. It can be taken, too, as suggesting an \(unlikely\!\) ancient origin of this practice.

In the ritual of *nyāsa*, too, the mental visualisation of the written shape of the *bīja* that is being placed is sometimes prescribed, or a written *bīja* or mantra is to be assigned somewhere. In the *Mantraparibhāṣā* \(chapter 293\) of the AgP, for instance, a *lipinyāsa* is prescribed, for which the *śaktis* of Rudra \(that is, the fifty *akṣaras* from *A* to *KṢA*\) are to be written, then ritually placed on the body of the *sādhaka* \(*vilikhet … vinyāset, śl.* 147\).18 More important, perhaps as regards the role of written letters or mantras \(it is well known that any *akṣara* can be considered as a *bījamantra*, from *AṂ* to *AḤ* and to *KṢAṂ*\) is the conception of Lipidevī, the \(written\) Alphabet Goddess19 mentioned, for instance, in AgP 293, or that of the ‘Tree of letters’, *lipitaru*, of the ŚT 7.08–14, under which the Goddess is seated. Among alphabet deities is also the goddess Mālinī of the Trika \(and of some Śaiva Kaśmirian systems\) which consists in a particular order of the Sanskrit alphabet, going from *ṆA* to *PHA* \(the *ṇādiphāntakrama*\).20 One finds it written in a triangular ritual diagram, a \[*mālinī*\]*gahvara* shown in the *Tantrasadbhāvatantra*. But, according to some texts, it can also be written in a gupta script, the letters being correlated with body parts. Since a mantra is always fundamentally an oral principle, when this representation of the Mālinī mantra-deity is ritually used, that is, mentally worshipped, the practice would combine oral, visual and mental elements.21 The written form of the letter *A* in the *devanāgarī* script is also sometimes the basis of a meditation, the different parts of the letter being meditated as embodying the movements of the supreme energy, *kunḋalinī*.22

We must also refer here to the ritual procedures used for the *uddhāra*, or for the research of the *aṃśa* of mantras, where letters of the Sanskrit alphabet are, for the *mantroddhāra*, written \(often in a particular secret order\) on a diagram, called *prastāra* or *ghavara*,23 or, for the research of the *aṃśa*, on *cakras* of various shapes, all procedures that are used in all Tantric traditions, whether Śaiva or Vaiṣṇava.24 Incidentally, we may remark that the prescription in tantras of such written procedures shows that these texts, though supposedly revealed, were originally written. We must also not forget the numerous uses of written mantras on amulets \(*kavaca*\) which, extremely frequent in modern times and nowadays, are in fact a very ancient use.

Coming back to the oral nature of mantras and to the practices we have seen of *saṃpuṭa*, etc., one must say that, to a large extent, these notions and practices can be traced back to Vedic origins. The Vedas were composed several centuries before writing began to be used in India. This explains perhaps the bias against the writing of revealed texts that was to appear later on, when writing began to be used \(seventh to eighth century BC?\). Writing was thus confined to practical, mundane uses and excluded from religious/ritual ones. However, since India was from early times a highly literate society, producing one of, if not *the* largest, literature in the world, there inevitably occurred interactions between the written and the unwritten traditions, a situation which resulted – to take a particular instance – in the \(apparent\) discrepancy between the in principle oral–aural nature of mantras and their written uses.25 We may note, too, that such mantric procedures as *vidarbha* and so forth, where the constituting parts of a mantra are separated, interpolated, duplicated, inverted, etc., have as their forerunners such Vedic usages as *viharaṇ a* and *vikr̥ti* \(intertwining or transposing\). In the same way, the use of ‘meaningless’ syllables or *bījas* added to, or interpolated in the sequence of a mantra can be traced back to the *vyāhr̥tis* of the Veda or to the syllables chanted by the Udgāta priest of the Sāmaveda.

Developed in a Sanskrit tradition going back to the Vedas, the Tantric *mantraśāstra* could not but participate in the main traits of some of the linguistic aspects of that tradition \(to which, from a certain time onward, it contributed largely\). Seen in this light, that is, as part of a stable and continuous but ever-changing culture, such seemingly out of the norm uses as those we have seen here appear as merely an aspect of a culture where the oral and the written have interacted during more than two millennia, and thus can never be entirely separated.26


