+++
title = "0"

+++
**Vaiśeṣikasūtra – A Translation**

This book introduces readers to Indian philosophy by presenting the first integral English translation of Vaiśeṣikasūtra as preserved by the earliest canonical commentary of Candrānanda \(7th century AD\) on the old aphorisms of the Vaiśeṣika school of Indian philosophy. 

The present monograph offers a canonical description of the fundamental categories of ontology and metaphysics, among which the category of ‘particularity’ 

\(viśeṣa\) plays a major role in the ‘problem of individuation’ of the ‘nature’ of substance in both Indian as well as Western metaphysics. This commentary should be read primarily in relation to Aristotle’s Categories. It is structured in 3 parts. 

Chapter 1 contains a general introduction to Indian philosophy and the Vaiśeṣika system. Chapter 2 is a textual-philological discussion on the commentary itself, since its first publication in 1961 by Muni Jambūvijayaji up to the present day. 

Chapter 3 is a ‘philosophical translation’ that reads Vaiśeṣika in the global context of Comparative Philosophy and aims to render this text accessible and comprehensible to all readers interested in ontology and metaphysics. 

A new reference work and a fundamental introduction to anyone interested in Indian and Comparative Philosophy, this volume will be of interest to scholars and students in Classical Studies, Modern Philosophy, and Asian Religions and Philosophies. 

**Ionut Moise** is a British Academy Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Exeter, UK, and a Research Fellow at The Oxford Centre for Hindu Studies, UK, where he teaches Comparative Philosophy. He is the author of *Salvation in Indian* *Philosophy*, which is also published by Routledge \(2020\). 

**Ganesh U. Thite** is Emeritus Professor at Tilak Maharashtra Vidyapeeth, Pune, and former Head of the Department of Sanskrit and Prakrit languages at the University of Pune. 


**VAIŚEṢIKASŪTRA – A TRANSLATION**

*Ionut Moise and Ganesh U. Thite*


*British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data*

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

*Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data*

Names: Kaṇāda. | Kaṇāda. Vaiśeṣikasūtra. Sanskrit. | 

Candrānanda. Vaiśeṣikasūtrāvṛtti English. | Jambūvijaya, Muni. | 

Moise, Ionut, 1982- translator. | Thite, Ganesh Umakant, translator. 

Title: Vaiśeṣikasūtra - a translation/Ionut Moise and Ganesh U. Thite. 

Other titles: Vaiśeṣikasūtra. English. 

Kaṇāda. Vaiśeṣikasūtra. | Ontology–Religious aspects–Hinduism. | 

Metaphyics. | Philosophy, Ancient. | Aristotle. 

Classification: LCC B132.V2 K313 2021 | DDC 181/.44–dc23 

LC record available at [https://lccn.loc.gov/2021003341](https://lccn.loc.gov)


**Contents**

*Acknowledgements *

vi

*Preface *

viii

*List of Abbreviations *

xi

*List of Appendices *

xiii

*List of Tables *

xiv

*Note on transliteration *

xv

1 Introduction to Indian philosophy and Vaiśeṣika 

1

2 Sources and resources on Vaiśeṣikasūtra 

40

3 Vaiśeṣikasūtra: Transliteration and translation 

49

*Appendix 1: Vaiśeṣika and world philosophy *

265

*Appendix 2: Vaiśeṣika scholasticism *

271

*Appendix 3: New Manuscripts on Vaiśeṣika *

273

*Bibliography *

278

*Index *

285

**Acknowledgements**

Many journeys back and forth, stretching from the shores of the Indian Ocean down the Adriatic Sea have been made since I began to work on this text. First, I would like to thank my Sanskrit guruji, Professor Ganesh U. Thite, who taught me most of the Sanskrit I know, and for his pleasure and patience in revising this translation, as well as for the innumerable readings we had on various textual traditions such as Vyākaraṇa, Vedānta, Jaina, Raghuvaṃśa, Pañcatantra, and Vaiśeṣika, no name but a few. Many teachers played an important role during my Indian studies. Professor Julius Lipner is indeed the first teacher who, while at Cambridge, introduced me to the study of Comparative Theology and Hinduism. 

He allowed me to attend his lectures during Easter Term 2009, and assisted me selflessly, with a bibliography and then wrote academic references at various transitional stages of my career \(Cambridge, Oxford, and Exeter\). A wonderful human being whose help I shall never forget. Vincenzo Vergiani’s reading sessions on Sanskrit were the first impact I had with Sanskrit. Then, at Oxford, Gavin Flood, Alexis Sanderson, Shrikant Bahulkar, James Benson, Christopher Minkowski, and Elisabeth Tucker. The pursuit to understand the Commentary of Candrānanda on Vaiśeṣikasūtra brought me to Italy where I had a long and fruitful meeting with Professor Leonardo Vittorio Arena in a coffee shop by the Adriatic Sea. The handicap I had with languages in general, forced me, however, to start again, this time in India, where I attended very useful summer schools, workshops, and group and individual courses on written and spoken Sanskrit with ‘grammar through exercises’ organised by Saṃskṛta Bhāratī. In Pune, Wai, Sawantwadi, and Sringeri, I talked to many teachers and pundits, young students and experienced academics alike, but perhaps the most unforgettable experience was the series of 9 daily lessons \(āhnika\) I had, deep in the jungle in Goa, with Mahāmahopādhyāya Pundit Devadatta Patil. I wish to acknowledge the generous support of the European Union and the scholarship granted to me through the Erasmus Mundus programme \(Experts4 Asia\) \(December 2015–October 2016\). 

It was the time when, as the UK went to the polls to vote Brexit, my methodological focus changed for good, mostly under the influence of Wilhelm Halbfass’ 

works ‘On Being and What There Is’ and ‘India and Europe.’ Finally, I wish to praise Ms Jacquie Rawes, who looked over the problematic English of this translation. Her insights were so intuitive that she was able to spot when a word choice 

*Acknowledgements * vii

in the translation was wrong. A token of gratitude to Ms Dorothea Schaefter of Routledge Hindu Studies Series, for making all this published work possible, and my English friends, Professor Sir David Winkley and his good wife Dr Linda Winkley, as well as Ranjit Sondhi \(OBE\) under whose encouragements I began work on a new project, a comparative philosophy of difference. 

Ionut Moise

British Academy Postdoctoral Fellow, 

University of Exeter

**Preface**

It is a matter of great delight that we present to all philosophy students the first integral English translation of Candrānanda’s Vṛtti, the oldest commentary available on the sūtras of the Vaiśeṣika school of Indian philosophy. The system is a robust ontology that presents, in 6 major categories, a complete picture of the world. Its description goes through a set of definitions that define substances from their concrete condition to their abstract state. A full draft of the current translation was made during the summer of 2019, in the Sackler Library at Oxford, but, given uncertainties concerning syntax, I had to call on the help of my Sanskrit guruji, the eminent Professor Ganesh U. Thite of Pune University, for a revision. 

Thus, in the course of the spring of 2020, I returned to Pune to revise the whole of the translation, and following the dramatic deterioration of a global pandemic, Professor Thite and I were forced to continue working on this revision through the medium of WhatsApp video calls, both in India and the UK \(March to June 2020\). 

As we were both under lockdown, we kept on meeting online and while I was reading to him my rough draft, he judiciously stopped to correct me, each time when my reading went wrong. This is the fruit of a wonderful and unforgettable Indo-European collaboration, and I am delighted to publish it in co-authorship with my Sanskrit mentor, Professor Ganesh Thite. 

The introductory chapter seeks to provide a textual reading of the ‘editio princeps’ of Vaiśeṣikasūtra edited by Muni Jambūvijayaji at Baroda 1961, the very edition which this translation has used. I discuss the MSS on which this edition is based and other MSS on which Isaacson and Ruzsa have improved upon, as well as other 5 new MSS on the Sūtrapāṭha, which the editor Ionut Moise photographed at Wai, Mysore, Bombay, and Madras while in India with an Erasmus Fellowship \(December 2015–September 2016\). This is, of course, an incomplete contribution to the reconstruction of the ‘independent transmission’ \(Wezler, 1982\) of the Vaiśeṣikasūtra, for more MSS work must still be done in due course, mainly because the recent description of the entry ‘Vaiśeṣikasūtras,’ which the New Catalogus Catalogorum, vol. 32, published recently \(2013\), gives us important clues concerning locations of MSS on Sūtrapāṭha. Here, I should like to highlight the importance of a second Vaiśeṣika commentary, Bhaṭṭa Vādīndra’s Vyākhyā 

*Preface * ix

\(VSv\) \(short and long version, respectively\) – again not available in English – 

whose glosses shed new light on both the early and later history of Vaiśeṣika tenets, at least prior to the Navya-Nyāya period when the Vaiśeṣika system is inflated with additional concepts or becomes simply assimilated by the Nyāya scholastic tradition. Both texts – VSc and VSv – are of paramount importance, but the current translation aims to disseminate Indian philosophy in a global context, through the discipline of comparative philosophy. Indeed, if there is any originality that this edition carries, then it lies in the attempt of the editors to read Indian philosophy in the context of world philosophy, and following an Indian academic tradition, to bring Indian philosophy in conversation with world philosophy at large. 

Before reading this translation, the student needs to learn the lists of 9 substances and 24 qualities indicated often briefly by the particle ‘ādi’ \(‘and so forth’\). The knowledge of substances and qualities is of chief importance for understanding Vaiśeṣika’s ontology, as well as the broader picture of ‘reality’ \(metaphysics\); for that matter, I have marked all 9 substances and 24 qualities in commas, mostly when these are used in the nominal form. In this darśana, nouns and entities seem to be more important than verbs. I have translated the overwhelming use of the particle ‘-ādi’ \(etc.\) by the expression ‘and so forth.’ For example, the student needs to read ‘dravyādi’ with the whole list of 9 substances in mind. Another thing to bear in mind when reading the Sūtras \(Vaiśeṣikasūtra, Sūtrapāṭha\) is to recollect the subject stated in the previous aphorisms because Sanskrit syntax is condensed, and the subject is not repeated but rather assumed and ‘hidden’ as it were in the preceding sūtras. For Roman transliteration, although, I initially followed the conventions set by the Baroda 1961 edition, I decided nevertheless to keep compounds \(guṇa and vṛddhi\) united and apply word division whenever necessary. 

Within scholarship, there have been other translation attempts of Candrānanda’s Vṛtti from Vaiśeṣika scholars, which I had initially consulted. Such fragmentary translations can be found at Nozawa \(chapters VSc 1, VSc 2\) and Halbfass \(fragments VSc 1.2, VSc 9\), as well as several passages discussed and translated by Thakur \(2003\), Arena \(Sūtrapāṭha\), and Miyamoto \(fragments\), to name but a few. Although Thakur \(2003\) provides a translation of Sūtrapāṭha, it does not correspond to the Sūtrapāṭha preserved by Candrānanda. The student must be aware that the synopsis Thakur provides is an eclectic compilation of several commentators on Sūtrapāṭha: it is not a translation of Candrānanda’s commentary. 

The reason for the first integral English translation of Candrānanda’s Vṛtti \(VSc\) is 2-fold: \(1\) VSc is the oldest commentary on Sūtrapāṭha \(VS\) available at present; and \(2\) the fragmentary and incomplete translations we have on VSc transmitted by the scholars mentioned earlier seemed rather old-fashioned, or, from my point of view, simply incomprehensible. Since this translation developed in several stages over the past four years, I wish to acknowledge the support of several important European, English, and Indian trusts: the Spalding Trust, the Teape Trust, the Infosys Foundation, and the Oxford Centre for Hindu Studies. 

x * Preface*

Finally, I wish to express my gratitude to Bjarne Wernicke-Olesen for having kindly granted me his elegant Oxford study office where I could meet online with Ganesh Thite for the first revision of this work. 

11 July 2020, Oxford

**Ionut Moise**

Research Fellow, Oxford Centre for Hindu Studies

& 

**Ganesh U. Thite**

Emeritus Professor, Tilak Maharashtra Vidyapeeth, Pune

## Abbreviations

**ALMOIB** 

Alphabetical List of Manuscripts in the Oriental Institute, 

Baroda. 

**Arist Cat. ** 

Aristotle’s Categories \(ed. J. L. Ackrill.\). 

**AS** 

Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatiques. 

**Car** 

Caraka Saṁhitā. 

**CC** 

Corpus Christianorum, Series Graeca and Series Latina, 

Brepols Publishers. 

**CSPM** 

Catalogue of Sanskrit and Prakṛti Manuscripts, Ahmedabad. 

**DP** 

Daśapadārthaśāstra of Candra, H. Ui ed. 1917. 

**GIP** 

Geschichte der Indischen Philosophie. Frauwallner, Erich. 

**GOS** 

Gaekwad’s Oriental Series. 

**GRETIL** 

Göttingen Register of Electronic Texts in Indian Languages. 

**HIP** 

History of Indian Philosophy. Frauwallner, Erich. \(English\). 

**HSPCIC** 

History of Science Philosophy and Culture in Indian Civilization. 

**IBS** 

Indological and Buddhist Studies. 

**JAOS** 

Journal of the American Oriental Society. 

**JIP** 

Journal of Indian Philosophy. 

**JOIB** 

Journal of the Oriental Institute, Baroda. 

**Kir Udayana’s** Kiraṇāvalī. In PD. 

**Loeb** 

Loeb Classical Library \(online\). 

**LSJ** 

A Greek-English Lexicon. Eds. H.G. Liddell, R. Scott, 1968 \(online\). 

**LXX** 

The Septuagint. Rahlfs/Hanhart. Eds. \(online\). 

**MBhV** 

Vyākaraṇa-Mahābhāṣya of Patañjali

**MBhD** 

Mahābhāṣyadīpikā of Bhartṛhari

**MW** 

Monier-Williams Sanskrit Dictionary \(online\). 

**Mysore N.D** 

A New Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts, 

Mysore, 1984. 

**NK** 

Śrīdhara’s commentary on PD. 

**OHHAP** 

Oxford Handbook of the History of Analytic Philosophy. 

**PD** 

Praśastapāda’s Bhāṣya in GOS. 

**PG** 

Bibliotheca Patrum Graeca, J. P. Migne 1865

xii * Abbreviations*

**PGL** 

PGL Patristic Greek Lexicon. Lampe, G. W. H. 1961 \(online\). 

**SII** 

Studien zur Indologie unt Iranistik

**SP** 

Śivāditya’s Saptapadārthī. 

**VIJ** 

Vishveshvaranand Indological Journal. 

**VP** 

Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari

**VS** 

Sūtrapāṭha of VSc \(with tentative reconstruction from the 

‘independent transmission’\). 

**VSc** 

Candrānanda’s Vṛtti, GOS 136. 

**VSi** 

Il Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Di Kaṇāda. Trans. Leonardo V. Arena

**VSś** 

Vaiśeṣika aphorisms of Kaṇāda, trans. Gough, A.E. 

**VSv** 

Vādīndra’s Vyākhyā. Darbhanga 1957. 

**Vyo** 

Vyomaśiva commentary on PD. 

**Wai D. II. ** 

Descriptive catalogue of MSS Prājña Pāṭhaśālā Maṇḍaḷa, Wai. 

**WZKS** 

Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens. 

Note: For another list of abbreviations, especially on the primary sources, see the Bibliography. 

**Appendices**

1 

Vaiśeṣika and world philosophy 

265

2 

Vaiśeṣika scholasticism 

271

3 

New Manuscripts on Vaiśeṣika 

273

## Tables

1.1 MSS on Candrānanda’s Vṛtti \(VSc\) 

23

1.2 Themes and topics in VSc by chapters 

26

1.3 Major subjects in VSc 

38

**Note on transliteration**

Transliteration. For the Roman transliteration of VSc, although I initially followed the canon set by Muni Jambūvijayaji, I decided to follow instead the advice of Bjarne Wernicke-Olesen by keeping compounds united \(guṇa and vṛddhi\), and apply whenever possible the appropriate word division. Inconsistences may occur. Since the gloss is too brief, I have decided not to capitalise the beginning of sentences in either transliteration or translation. For variant manuscript readings, I recommend a comparison between Jambūvijayaji’s footnotes with other valuable contributions of new manuscripts reading brought forth by Harunaga Isaacson \(in his PhD unpublished thesis, 1995\), as well as Ferenc Ruzsa’s transliteration on VSc that is available online [\(academia .e du](http://dx.doi.org/academia.edu)\). I do really hope that my transliteration will spare students’ time and will encourage them to use and quote from Candrānanda’s commentary more often in any Indian philosophical study henceforth. 

In this edition, I have not followed the convention of putting either Sanskrit, Greek, or Latin in italics. Since this edition addresses both philosophy and Indology scholars, engaging with both Greek philosophical and Sanskrit 

sources, given its accuracy and widespread acceptance, I decided to follow IAST 

\(International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration\) for Sanskrit. More generally, in the Bibliography, I have consulted and used the diacritics for the Sanskrit authors and works referred as these appear in the Bodleian Libraries Catalogue \(SOLO\). Whenever I have referred to a particular Sanskrit term in brackets, I have opted for the ‘stem form’ of MW Dictionary \(e.g. for karma, karman\). When I have not done so, I gave a portion of the quotation. I have also used Sanskrit terminology more colloquially \(‘theory of karma,’ or the plural form ‘dravyas’\), not least because such concepts are already established within scholarship. The most striking feature perhaps is the ‘excessive’ use of commas for all ontological categories \(substance, quality, motion, universal, particular, inherence\). As this introduction explains, Vaiśeṣika is a substantialist philosophy, therefore, the reader must be alert when a word used in its nominal form occurs, and whenever categories occur in the text. For the same reason, I put only the uncertain terminological translations in brackets, for example, ‘substance’ \(dravya\). Sometimes, I analysed terms without even supplying a translation for these \(e.g., saṃskāra\), as I consider their English rendering controversial. The Index with the Glossary 

xvi * Note on transliteration*

at the end will help in this respect. For Greek literature, however, given the different styles of Romanisation, and in order to leave any ambiguity out, I found it straightforward to render the quotation in the Greek script itself, as is printed in most bilingual and critical editions. For the same reason, such an approach may be followed when dealing with other Oriental languages as well \(Arabic, Syriac, etc.\). The Sanskrit transliteration of Candrānanda’s Vṛtti commentary has been made by Ferenc Ruzsa \([academia.edu\). ](http://dx.doi.org/academia.edu)However, the shortcoming of his feat is that he worked on the 1982 edition, which Isaacson recommends avoiding as it contains a sprinkle of new misprints. Hence, in all my work, I have relied on Jambūvijayaji’s first edition \(1961\), which I have referred and quoted throughout. 

The electronic transliteration that Ruzsa made used different electronic diacritics, which made their reproduction very difficult. I had to reread and retype it all, both against the Baroda 1961 edition, as well as in comparison with a new but incomplete transliteration available at DCS \(Digital Corpus of Sanskrit; available at [www .sanskrit -linguistics .org /dcs /index .php ?contents =texte](http://www.sanskrit-linguistics.org)\). Nevertheless, I have fruitfully used the philological material of my Vaiśeṣika predecessors: Isaacson and Ruzsa, who are best equipped to supply a new critical edition of Vaiśeṣikasūtra. 

Referencing. In both footnotes and bibliography, I have used an abbreviated form of the Oxford referencing system with only the author’s surname, year, and the page \(e.g., Halbfass, 1992, p. 234\), and no brackets for the year. An exception to this rule has been in the footnotes where I have recommended a title for the readership mentioning only surname, title and year \(Quinton, The Nature of Things, 1973\). For English, I have used English grammar and spelling \(e.g. realise, instead of realize\). The first section of the introductory chapter addresses a worldwide philosophical audience providing a brief overview of what Indian philosophy is and where Vaiśeṣika stands in this overall picture. This sort of explanation continues in the footnotes of the translation. The second part of the chapter is more technical for it aims to put forward preliminary material for a future critical edition on Vaiśeṣikasūtra \(Sūtrapāṭha\). Illustrations on Vaiśeṣika manuscripts and their location is a good starting point. For the benefit of philosophy students, I have appended 2 charts/illustrations: ‘Vaiśeṣika and world philosophy’ and the 2 

charts ‘Vaiśeṣika and world philosophy’ and the ‘Vaiśeṣika scholasticism.’



## Document Outline

- Cover
- Half Title
- Series Page
- Title Page
- Copyright Page
- Table of Contents
- Acknowledgements
- Preface
- List of Abbreviations
- Appendices
- List of Tables
- Chapter 1 Introduction to Indian philosophy and Vaiśeṣika
- Chapter 2 Sources and resources on Vaiśeṣikasūtra
- Chapter 3 Vaiśeṣikasūtra: Transliteration and translation
- Appendix 1: Vaiśeṣika and world philosophy
- Appendix 2: Vaiśeṣika scholasticism
- Appendix 3: New Manuscripts on Vaiśeṣika
- Bibliography
- Index


