+++
title = "1294 Verse 1960-1961"

+++
## Original 
>
> बलासादिप्रभावेण नच तेषां समुद्भवः ।  
> पूर्ववद्व्यभिचारस्य सर्वथाऽप्युपलम्भतः ॥ १९६० ॥  
> तस्मादेते यदभ्यासपूर्वका आद्यभाविनः ।  
> स एवान्यभवः सिद्ध इति नास्तिवता हता ॥ १९६१ ॥ 
>
> *balāsādiprabhāveṇa naca teṣāṃ samudbhavaḥ* \|  
> *pūrvavadvyabhicārasya sarvathā'pyupalambhataḥ* \|\| 1960 \|\|  
> *tasmādete yadabhyāsapūrvakā ādyabhāvinaḥ* \|  
> *sa evānyabhavaḥ siddha iti nāstivatā hatā* \|\| 1961 \|\| 
>
> The origination of the feelings cannot be due to phlegm and the rest. because, as in the previous case, the entire falsity of this idea is perceived in experience.—For these reasons, that time repeated practice during which is the cause of the feelings appearing for the first time, must be the ‘other birth’, which thus becomes established; and the doctrine of ‘non est’ becomes damned.—(1960-1961)



## Kamalaśīla

Some people have held the following view:—“Love proceeds from *Phlegm* (in the physical constitution of the Body),—Hatred from *Bile*,—and Delusion from *Wind*”.

The answer to that is as follows:—[*see verses 1960-1961 above*]

‘*Balāsa*’ is *Phlegm*.

‘*As* *in* *the* *previous case*’,—in the case of objects, as shown under *Text* 1950 above.

Then again, as a matter of fact, there is no increase and decrease in the feelings of Love, etc. upon increase and decrease of Phlegm. And when the change in one thing does not bring about a change in the other, the former cannot be the cause of the latter,—Similarly, fierce *Hatred*, and not fierce *Love*, has been seen to appear in one with preponderance of Phlegm; while one with preponderance of Bile is found to have fierce *Love*, not fierce *Hatred*; this sort of comingling is often met with; and when one thing appears without the other, this latter cannot be the cause of the former. Further, the man with *Love* is often found to be in the same condition as the man with *Hatred*.—From these non-concomitances, it follows that the feelings of Love, etc. are not the effects of Phlegm, etc.

‘*Tasmāt*’—*Thus*; this sums up the chapter.

‘*Yadabhyāsa*, *etc. etc*.’—The compound is to be expounded as—‘Repeated experience during which is the cause of the feelings in question’.—(1960-1961)


