+++
title = "Upadana"

+++
In Indian **philosophy**, the word  
*upadana* denotes the “material cause”  
for something, that is, the stuff from  
which it is formed. Although this notion  
seems obvious to modern materialist  
ears, it carries several important  
assumptions that not all Indian  
philosophical schools were willing to  
720  
Uma  
concede—namely, that there were real  
objects in the world, that they were  
made from other things, and that these  
things underwent real transformations.  
The notion of a material cause was held  
by the “realist” schools, most notably  
the **Samkhya**, **Nyaya-Vaisheshika**,  
and **Vishishthadvaita Vedanta**. It was  
opposed by the Buddhist schools, whose  
assumption that reality was constantly  
changing made the notion of real things  
problematic. It was also opposed by the  
**Advaita Vedanta** school, whose starting  
assumption was that ultimately there  
was only one “real” thing—the formless  
**Brahman** (Supreme Reality)—and thus  
that the notion of anything becoming  
anything else was in error.