+++
title = "13 The Jain Monk Jinapati Suri Gets the Better of a Nath Yogi"

+++

Paul Dundas  

Perhaps more than any other Indian religious tradition, Jainism has placed a high  value on maintaining barriers of physical and moral restraint and self-discipline  in order to advance on the path to liberation. The entire regimen of the religion's  adherents, at least as ideally conceived, has been oriented toward the ascetic  quieting of the mind, body, and speech. The aim is to reduce and ultimately  eliminate the flow of karmic matter, which brings about both the soul's embod 

iment, whether in human or lesser form, and loss of its perfect qualities of bliss,  energy, and knowledge, with consequent entanglement in the time-bound world  of rebirth. Tantric practices have tended to flourish in India whenever a religious  establishment that claims a monopoly on purity of behavior has erected bound 

aries against what it perceives to be the encroaching dangers of society and nature.  The response that is generated would see true religiosity in radically experiential  terms, linked to the deliberate breaching or ignoring of these boundaries. From  this perspective, Jainism would appear to provide a classic scenario for the even 

tual emergence of a reorientation of its soteriological path that would fall within  the general sphere of Tantra. Even to those well informed about the dynamics of  South Asian soteriological traditions, however, it might seem strange to think of  medieval Jain monks as Tantric adepts.  

Here we should be clear about what is meant by "Tantra" in the Jain context.  Although some Jain teachers from the early medieval period onward did advocate  judging the external world in terms of the one true reality, the innermost soul,  and consequently downgraded workaday experience by reference to it, there can 

not be found within Jainism any serious claim that conventional social and moral  values should be turned upside-down by engaging in antinomian sexual and ritual  practices. Extreme forms of behavior indicating an attempted direct engagement  with some variety of unconditioned of unmediated reality seem to have been  advocated -only within those South Asian traditions that had nondualism as an 

232 PAUL DUNDAS  

ideological basis. The Jains, pluralist realists throughout their intellectual history,  have consistently rejected nondualism and its philosophical affine, monism,  whether of a Hindu or Buddhist provenance, as equivalent to idealism.  

However, the possibility of using sanctified language of a general Tantric idiom  in the attempt to gain worldly goals has never caused the Jains any difficulty, and  in common with the Hindus and Buddhists they cultivated an elaborate science  of mantra and yantra (mantrasastra) that enabled them, often with the aid of  tutelary deities, to participate within a performative world of magic and esoteric  ritual. Mantras and magic spells are, in fact, credited with great antiquity in Jain 

ism, having supposedly constituted the whole of the tenth section of the massive  Purva ("prior") scriptures that finally disappeared very early in the common era,  if indeed they ever existed at all. Legends also accrued around a number of man trasiddhas, or "mantra masters," named Revati, Rohini, Nagarjuna, Khaputacarya  and Yasobhadra who are given traditional datings that would locate them as living  from about the second century B.C.E. to the tenth century c.E. However, these  individuals, who are regarded as Jain exemplars in the practice of magic, have  little reality beyond legend; Nagarjuna, for one, also appears in a large number  of guises in Buddhist tradition. The early medieval literature prescribing correct  monastic behavior is clearly uneasy with the performance of magic ritual by Jain  monks, which suggests that this may have been a common practice. Unfortu 

nately, the trajectory of early Jain mantric practices cannot be precisely delineated  much beyond this. Nonetheless, it can be said that probably through a combi nation of the influence of the requirements of a burgeoning life-cycle and temple  ceremonial and increasing exposure to prestigious Saiva styles of mantric usage,  by around the eleventh century the Jains had evolved their own particular brand  of mantrasastra and attendant ritual. Monastic participation within this mantric  culture was no longer frowned upon. Indeed, the ability to manipulate magic  spells successfully and thus overcome human or divine opponents came to be  seen as one of the major ways by which a monk could bring glory to the Jain  religion.  

Jain use of mantras has, broadly speaking, been centred on alloforms or vari ants, often of some length, of the Pancanamaskara, "The Five Homages," a ben edictory formula of salutation to the omniscient saints, liberated beings, teachers,  preceptors, and monks, which was composed in the vernacular Prakrit language  and in its complete form perhaps dates from around the beginning of the common  era, although in Jain tradition it is reckoned to be eternal. From early medieval  times to the present day, Jain scholars have analyzed this mantra and speculated  on the nature of its power and its correlation with the constituent parts of the  human body. However, an important mantra that came to preoccupy medieval  Jains greatly (and that will be encountered in the passage translated below) has  only tangential connections with "The Five Homages," at least in external form.  This is the surimantra, a mantra from whose power the very continuity of Jainism  was regarded as deriving.  

Strictly speaking, the surimantra is the formula (once again couched in Prakrit, 

JAIN MONK, NATH YOGI 23 3  

not Sanskrit, as is normal in other Indian mantric cultures) transmitted privately  by a senior Jain teacher, or suri, of one of the Svetambara ("White-Robed") image worshiping sects to a pupil during the ceremony in which the latter is promoted  to that same rank. Many elaborate cloth paintings, called patas, exist with suri mantras inscribed on them within elaborate yantra-like designs that were pre sented to newly appointed suris to commemorate their promotion. One of the  regular obligations of a suri is to recite this mantra and meditate upon it every  night for the well-being of the members of his sect, both ascetics and lay followers.  Meditation upon the surimantra by the leader of a sectarian group was in the late  medieval period also a vital element in the location of an appropriately qualified  successor.  

Although the hagiographies of the post-eleventh-century Svetambara sectarian  leaders take care to hedge the surimantra around with secrecy, the medieval ritual  handbooks, or kalpas, show no reticence about recording the mantra's wording  and the ritual by which the powers located in it could be realized. Indeed, so  many different transmissions have been preserved that it is impossible to talk of  one central version of the surimantra, whatever claims to exclusivity the com 

peting sectarian traditions might have made. The kalpas describe how the mantra  was originally transmitted by Rsabha, the first of the twenty-four saving teachers,  or tirthahkaras, of this world age - and gradually became differentiated and di minished from its original length of three hundred verses, as the physical and  moral stature of humanity slowly but inexorably declined over vast periods of  time, until it was finally reduced at the very end of this world age to a mere two  and half verses in length.  

The earliest evidence for the surimantra simply links it to the ritual for teacher  consecration and image installation. By the eleventh century, however, it had also  become a crucial element of legitimation for the leaders of the various Svetambara  Jain sects (gacchas) that emerged at that time. By means of the surimantra, a suri  could demonstrate his authority within his sect by mastering through meditation  and ritual the various magic powers embodied in the mantra, such as curing  disease and overcoming enemies, and thus ultimately transform himself into the  latter-day equivalent of Gautama, the miracle-working favourite disciple of the  twenty-fourth trrthahkara, Mahavira. Although the result gained from the suri mantra ritual is not specifically stated to be enlightenment and subsequent free 

dom from rebirth, it can nonetheless be said that here Jain Tantra, normally  oriented toward material and worldly goals, becomes more soteriological than at  any other point.  

A typical example of the surimantra is divided into various sections, as many  as five, called prasthanas or pithas, each of which has a presiding deity. The first  section, standard in all transmissions of the surimantra, contains expressions of  homage (similar in form to those found in the Pancanamaskara formula referred  to above) to a variety of Jain advanced spiritual types and also a formally expressed  expectation of success in the ritual linked to the mantra. The next two sections  generally invoke the various labdhis, or magic powers, possessed by Mahavira's 

234 PAUL DUNDAS  

disciple Gautama and offer praise to the great warrior-ascetic Bahubali, the son  of the tirthahkara Rsabha, whose attainment of enlightenment without scriptural  knowledge seems to have provided an attractive model for those monks who saw  themselves as following the Jain path in debased times during which serious  learning was at a premium.  

The fourth and fifth sections usually contain strings of mantric language, Prakrit  combined with esoteric words such as meru, framed by the power syllable Om  and the ancient Vedic invocation svaha. These sections are more overtly oriented  toward spiritual attainments and the transformation of the suri into the equivalent  of Gautama. According to some monastic commentators, the fifth and most ad 

vanced section of the surimantra, called mantraraja, "king of mantras" (a desig nation that is often used by synecdoche to refer to the whole mantra) encompasses  and is equivalent to the preceding four sections. Contemplation of the mantra by  the suri was ideally to take place within a mandala-like diagram modeled on the  balustraded assembly hall where gods, humans, and animals gather to hear each  tirthahkara preach. The restrained and ascetic activities of fasting and confession  were necessary components of the accompanying ritual, thus marking it out as  specifically Jain. Making offerings in consecrated fires, indicative of a more general  Tantric idiom, is also advocated in the ritual handbooks.  

One of the Svetambara Jain subsects that placed particular emphasis on the  surimantra was the Kharatara Gaccha, which took its name from the epithet  "Sharpwitted" (kharatara) bestowed in 1024 C.E. by a king on one of its early  teachers after a victory in public debate. The passage translated below focuses  upon three of the suris of this sect, Jinadatta Suri (1075-1154), perhaps the  greatest leader of the Kharatara Gaccha, his successor Jinacandra Suri (1140- 

1166), known as Manidharin, "Jewel Bearer," because he had a precious stone in  his forehead (an attribute not fully explained by the chroniclers but possibly  connected with the narratives about the legendary mantrasiddha YaSobhadra, who  was similarly endowed), and his successor Jinapati Suri (1153-1220). The chron 

iclers of the Kharatara Gaccha are particularly concerned to portray these monks  as protectors and enrichers of their followers through their magical powers and,  in particular, as vying for supremacy with the yoginis who controlled some of the  major cities of western India.  

The cult of the yoginis, the sixty-four semidivine sorceresses and shape-chang ers, although of indeterminate origin (sixth century C.E.?), had become extremely  popular in north India by around the tenth or eleventh centuries. Benevolent  protectresses and agents of inner transformation when propitiated by their Saiva  votaries but malevolent and vengeful if crossed, these sorceresses were particularly  associated by the Jains with Delhi, called in the Kharatara Gaccha sources Yogi nipura, "City of the Yoginis," a dangerous place of the black arts. They are also  portrayed as having strongholds in the cities of Ajmer, Ujjain, and Broach. The  yoginis represent for the Jains a malign form of Tantric magic, as does the mys terious Nath yogi who appears later in the passage below as a stock representative 

JAIN MONK, NATH YOGI 23 5  

of a Saiva sect with which the Jains contested for local patronage in western India  for centuries and also at times achieved a kind of accomodation.  The early chronicler of the Kharatara Gaccha, Jinapala, who probably wrote  around the middle of the thirteenth century, refers only in passing to the perils  of Delhi and Jinadatta's conversion of the yoginis at Ujjain, and he says nothing  of Jinacandra's having had a jewel in his forehead. A cycle of traditional stories  quickly emerged, however, as the Kharatara Gaccha expanded its sense of identity  and history; it described how Jinadatta compelled the yoginis of Delhi to bestow  boons upon the sect and how the young Jinapati Suri won back his master Jin acandra's jewel through the power of the surimantra. Here we gain a glimpse of  Tantra as it was perceived to operate "on the ground" in medieval India, func tioning not as an esoteric and learned soteriology but as a magic weapon in the  struggle for sectarian dominance. A consistent theme in these narratives is the  ability through spells to paralyze an opponent. This is one of the "six acts" (sat karmani), a form of black magic common to most Tantric traditions, with the  other five being calming disease and inimical spirits, bringing others under one's  control, sowing dissension among one's enemies, causing psychological turmoil  in an individual so that he abandons his normal life, and killing. Jain monks saw  no moral difficulty in engaging in such magic.  

The following extract is taken from the third of three anonymous Sanskrit  chronicles or pattavalis, "Lists of the Holders of the Patta," which describes the  main events in the lives of the leaders of the Kharatara Gaccha up to 1617. The  term patta signifies the seal tied on the forehead of a traditional Indian monarch  at the time of his consecration and indicates the royal imagery with which the  Jains surrounded their great teachers. The style of this particular pattavali is  clipped and unembellished (although without the strong vernacularization that  characterizes much Jain Sanskrit literature of this period), and I have occasionally  smoothed it out. In the interests of providing a self-contained narrative, I have  also omitted the pattavali's descriptions of the miracles performed by Jinadatta in  the period prior to his death. Although according to Jain usage the title of suri is  incorporated into a teacher's name (for example Jinapatisuri), I have throughout  kept it separate.  

An equivalent narrative recorded by an earlier anonymous Prakrit chronicle  entitled the Vrddhacaryaprabandhavali, "Series of Biographies of the Old Teach ers," provides some explanations that amplify the version below. Thus we are told  that on his deathbed Jinadatta had forbidden his successors to travel to any of  the cities that fell within the influence of the yoginis. Jinacandra's otherwise odd  and ultimately fatal visit to Delhi is explained as the result of an earnest request  by the Jain community there. In addition, this same chronicle attributes the vin 

dictive behavior of the Nath yogi to his anger at the unwillingness of the Jain laity  to give him alms. It is noteworthy that, according to the second of the pattavalis  edited by Muni Jinavijaya, Jinapati magically summons his dead teacher Jinacan dra to help him against the yogi. 

236 PAUL DUNDAS  

The passage translated below, the third of three anonymous chronicles, is taken  from the Kharataragacchapattavalisamgraha, edited by, Muni Jinavijaya (Calcutta:  Puran Chand Nahar, 1932), pp. 49-52.  

4*.  

Further Reading  

Paul Dundas, "Becoming Gautama: Mantra and History in Svetambara Jainism,"  in John E. Cort, ed., Jain Communities and Cultures in Indian History (Albany: State  University of New York Press, 1998), pp. 31-52, provides a contextualization of  the surimantra, along with an analysis of one particular transmission of it. The  bibliography of this article should also be consulted for primary sources on Jain  mantrasastra and the Kharatara Gaccha, including the Vrddhacaryaprabandhavali.  Phyllis Granoff provides a study of the hagiographies of the two greatest Kharatara  Gaccha exponents of Tantra in "Jinadattasuri and Jinaprabhasuri: Two Studies  from the Svetambara Jain Tradition," in Speaking of Monks: Religious Biography in  India and China, edited by Phyllis Granoff and Koichi Shinohara (Oakville, On 

tario: Mosaic Press, 1992), pp. 1-96. Lawrence A. Babb, Absent Lord: Ascetics and  Kings in a Jain Ritual Culture (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California  Press, 1996), chapter 3, places the episode I have translated in the ritual and  devotional context of current-day Svetambara Jainism in Rajasthan.  

For the yogini cult in medieval India, see Vidya Dehejia, Yogini Cult and Temples:  A Tantric Tradition (New Delhi: National Museum, 1986); R. Nagaswamy, "The  Sixty-Four Yoginis and Bhuta Worship as Mentioned by Sahkara in His Commen tary on the Bhagavad Gita," Berliner Indologische Studien 9-10 (1996): 237-46;  and David Gordon White, "Transformations in the Art of Love: Kamakala Practices  in Hindu Tantric and Kaula Traditions," History of Religions 38:2 (November  1998): 172-98. A description of the role of the yoginis in contemporary Hima layan Hinduism can be found in Helene Desirens, "Les Yogini de la haute vallee de  Kulu (Himachal Pradesh)," Bulletin d'Etudes lndiennes 9 (1991): pp. 61-73.  

The Nath yogi may be described slightly anachronistically by the chronicle  translated below, whose vantage point is around the second half of the seven teenth century. For the chronology and origins (probably late twelfth- to early  thirteenth- century) of the Nath sampradaya and for the relationship of this sect  with the Jains in western India, see David Gordon White, The Alchemical Body:  Siddha Traditions in Medieval India (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996),  pp. 90-101 and 117-19.  

Kharataragacchapattavalisamgraha, Third Pattavali  

Once Jinadatta Suri went to Delhi where the sixty-four yoginis had their ritual  sites. He did not pay homage to them, and so in anger the yoginis thought,  "Let us bewitch him." Then a friendly deity, who traveled between the various 

JAI N MONK , NAT H YOGI 237  

worlds, visited Jinadatta and warned him, "There are yoginis living here who  will try to bewitch you. Be careful." During the night Jinadatta summoned a  layman called Mahanasi and said to him, "Get sixty-four fresh mats ready and  bring them here. There is an important task to be performed." The layman  brought the mats that night, and Jinadatta recited mantras over them. In the  morning, when the time came to expound the scriptures, he told another lay 

man, "Today sixty-four laywomen will come in a crowd. They will stand in the  south, the inauspicious region of death, wearing white clothes. You must give  them the mats to sit on." While Jinadatta was preaching, the women came as  he had said, and the layman gave them the mats, as result of which they all  remained rooted to the spot, for they were in reality the yoginis who had been  paralyzed by the power of Jinadatta's mantras. At the end of his sermon, Jina 

datta said to them, "Be off now, but come again tomorrow morning."  The yoginis were deeply embarrassed, realizing that Jinadatta was a reposi tory of great mantric power, and they asked that their offense be pardoned  before they left. Jinadatta said, "Give me something in return." So they gave  him seven boons, namely, that Kharatara monks would generally not be fools;  Kharatara nuns would not follow the normal worldly behavior of women; Khar atara monks and nuns would not die from snakebite; statements made by fol lowers of the Kharatara Gaccha would be efficacious; there would be no danger  to the leaders of the Kharatara Gaccha from lightning; witches (safeims) would  not enchant members of the sect; and all Kharatara laymen beyond Delhi would  be rich and learned. The yoginis asked for a pledge in return, namely, that if  any of the monks who succeeded Jinadatta as leader of the Kharatara sect  should come to Delhi, Ajmer, Bhrgukaccha, or Ujjain, the abodes of the yoginis,  then he should simply take food and then go, without staying the night. If,  however, he were to stay the night for some reason, then he should not take  food. With this stipulation, the yoginis went back to where they had come  from.  

Jinadatta Suri died at the age of eighty-four at Ajmer, where the lay com munity erected a funerary monument to commemorate him. Jinacandra Suri,  who had become a monk at the age of nine, had been personally installed by  Jinadatta as his successor at Vikramapura in 1149. He had a jewel in his head.  One day a powerful Nath yogi saw him and realized that the suri had only five  years to live. At a later time Jinacandra went to Delhi. The yoginis there said,  "He has ignored the command we gave to Jinadatta. Let us bewitch him." So  they came at night, but through the power of the Jain flag on the monastic  lodging house their witchcraft did not work. They then turned themselves into  mice and carried off the flag. Waking up, Jinacandra turned himself into a cat  and chased after them. However, they managed to bewitch him. In the morning  the teacher entered the death-fast and said to the layman Kocara, "There is a  jewel in my head. At the time of my cremation, put a bowl of milk near the  funeral pyre and the jewel will fall into it. Worship it at home and you will  gain unfailing wealth." But when Jinacandra died, Kacora forgot what he had 

238 PAUL DUNDAS  

told him to do. The Nath yogi, however, prepared a bowl of milk when the  cremation was taking place, got hold of the jewel, and went off with it. Kacora  saw this and argued with him, but the yogi would not give him the jewel.  

Jinapati Suri was appointed Jinacandra Suri's successor at the age of fourteen  by Acarya Jayadeva in 1167 at the village of Baweraka, where a great festival  was held by two laymen to celebrate the event. He had attained this rank not  long after becoming a monk as a boy. Jinapati then went off with five hundred  monks to the town of Hamsi in the vicinity of Himsar to the north of Delhi,  where the laypeople had gotten an image of the tirthahkara Parsva made and  had built a new temple to house it. At the time of the installation of the image,  the Nath yogi who had taken the magic jewel also came there. He knew that  Jinacandra had possessed magic power and wanted to see whether his pupil  Jinapati had it as well. To this end, he employed a spell to immobilize the  image that was near the temple so that it would not move from its position.  The yogi then challenged the Jains, saying, "I have immobilized the image. Let  your leader raise it up."  

At this, the senior monks became deeply despondent, for none of them had  any magic power, and as a result the installation of the image could not take  place. The laywomen, egged on by a nun, mockingly sang, "The new moon  doesn't shed strong moonlight, so what can this young teacher of ours know?"  Hearing this, Jinapati thought that his life was not worth living. But then he  looked at his surimantra yantra, with the "king of mantras" portion, three and  a half words in length, inscribed in the middle. He put it aside and recited the  mantra, at which Padmavats, the tutelary goddess associated with the tirthah kara Parsva, appeared to help him.  

In the morning, while the senior monks and preceptors were expounding  the scriptures, Jinapati went to the temple and played with the children who  surrounded him. The yogi once again announced that he had immobilized the  image. But then Jinapati threw magically consecrated powder on his head and  so immobilized the yogi in turn. The entire Jain community assembled and the  installation ceremony was carried out to the accompaniment of praise of the  power of its teacher, even though he was so young. The yogi said, "Let me go.  Have pity." Jinapati replied, "Hand over the jewel from my teacher's head that  you took in Delhi." The yogi did so and said, "My dear sir! Take this source  of magic. However, a spell of the sort I have employed with it only succeeds if  betel nut is used." Jinapati replied, "We Jains are not allowed to chew betel  nut, because it is the equivalent of flesh. I do not care whether the spell is  successful or not." Then the yogi spat betel nut from his mouth and said,  "Worker of magic spells! Go back to the underworld where you came from.  There is nobody else in this world who can possess you." And the jewel, the  source of magic, went straight to the underworld. 
