+++
title = "15 The Anonymous Agama Prakasa"

+++

The Anonymous Agama Prakasa: Preface to  a Nineteenth-Century Gujarati Polemic  

Robin Rinehart and Tony K. Stewart  

In 1874, a substantial Gujarati book was published in the city of Ahmedabad by  an anonymous author, with a lengthy English title: Exposition of the Nigamas or  that portion of Hindoo Shastras which the dukshinas or Right Hand sect follows as their  books of revelation, i.e. Vedas, Sootra, Smritis, Pooranas &c. For the use of reformers  in India by the author of the "Nibandha Sangraha." The author prefaced the text,  which included extensive Sanskrit passages from more than seventy different  texts, like this:  

We dedicate the following pages to the thinking Public, who have curiosity to know  the ancient mode of worship proclaimed by the revelation called Nigamas. The an cient practices of a nation are often buried in oblivion, but those of India are well  preserved in its sacred literature. It is necessary that Reformers, in order to be suc cessful, ought to possess a knowledge of the ancient literature, which the people  have, through habit, ignorance and Priest-craft learned to venerate. The secrecy which  is attached to the sacred literature of the Brahmans, principally arises from the ig norance of the language in which it is written and by its being to a great extent, out  of vogue. The primeval sacrificial system, which is the basis of the ancient Vedic  Religion is cruel, uncouth, as well as opposed to the ideas of the present age. It would  not have been satisfactory to describe it without referring to authorities on each point  asserted and discussed. The book therefore is filled with authentic extracts from Vedic  literature, which is considered as revelation from the Most High. It has been hitherto  a special privilege of the Brahmans to recite it by rote and offer sacrifices in a manner  handed down from generation to generation, without understanding their purport  or condition of civilization in which they were ordained. Various miraculous powers  are attributed to the mantras and sacrifices and various stories, inculcating the holi ness of the Brahmans and power of their ritual are industriously circulated, in order  to create awe and respect among the ignorant masses. It becomes therefore necessary 

THE ANONYMOUS AGAMA PRAKASA 267  

to unveil this ritual as far as the limits of a small book will admit and to place within  the reach of the Reformers such portions of the ancient mode of worship as required  notice. This it is hoped may stimulate a further research, in those regions of antiquity,  which appear to be utterly neglected in India by those, whom they concern most.  The Religion of a nation greatly affects its destinies and progress. Adherence to the  ancient prejudices combined with the thickly prevailing ignorance and a powerful  priest-craft has produced baneful effects, such as early-marriages, miserable and  forced widowhood, prevention of travelling to foreign countries, slavery of female  sex, waste of money on useless objects, eleemosynary habits of one-tenth of the  population, internal dissentions, want of fellow-feeling and patriotism and above all  false worship of God. When reformers try to remove these effects, where do they  stumble? At the religious difficulty.  

The text purports to explain those features of the Hindu tradition that are  deemed admirable by the author, then explained by one pandit and further elu cidated by a second, but for the special purpose of encouraging emerging notions  of "progress" into "modernity." Apart from the diction, which appears a trifle  stilted to our contemporary sensibilities, there is nothing remarkable about such  a publication; it is typical of many such productions in the nineteenth century.  But later in that same year, a companion volume appeared by the same still  nameless author, which in its contrast with the first reveals not only the extent  of this reforming agenda but a remarkable taxonomic organization of the various  dimensions of Hindu practice and theory that anticipate the creation of the cate gory of Tantrism, which, as Andre Padoux has argued in the Encyclopedia of Re ligion, was a newly recognized independent category of religious experience con structed in the nineteenth century.  

The title of our anonymous author's companion volume and its preface, which  opens with the same telltale phrase, are worth quoting in full and with original  punctuation (pp. 1-2):  

Exposition of the Agamas or that Portion of Hindoo Shastras, which Vamees or Left  Hand Sect Follow as Their Books of Revelation, i.e. Tantras, Vamalas, Rujusias, &c.  for the Use of Reformers in India, by the Author of the "Nigama Prakash"  

We dedicate the following pages to the thinking Public, whose education and natural  public spirit have excited in them a curiosity for knowing the doctrines & dogmas  contained in that portion of the Hindoo Shastras which enjoy the title of "Agamas"  and which for a long time have remained a secret store, though they continue to  attract veneration from ignorance, habit or the pretentions of the professors of what  is called "Mantra Shastra." It is evident that they can not be properly appreciated,  unless they are in some degree unveiled and thrown open to the Reformers, who  wish to introduce changes, in order to establish a pure form of religion. The object  of these pages, is to hold up to light the most filthy, infernal and obscene superstitions  and pretended miraculous power of Maritra Shastris, who abound, in every town in  India, especially in native states, where they find a large-patronage. It would have 

2 6 8 ROBI N RINEHAR T AND TONY K . STEWAR T  

been useless simply to describe their practices without referring to their authorities.  The book, therefore, is filled up with extracts from Sanscrit-books, which enjoy the  notoriety of having been composed by Shiva, the great object of worship throughout  India. It would be easy to imagine what should be the degeneration and debasement  of a nation which not only gives currency to such literature as the Tantras, but  venerates them as revelation from the Most High. It is hoped that this publication  will induce all those, who are concerned in the welfare of this great nation to unite  in one common effort to put down the diabolical tenets inculcated by the "Vami" and  "Kowl" sects. The secrecy with which they are practiced & propagated, is a real  obstacle, which must, to a great extent, baffle the exertions of Reformers but it must  be recollected that perseverance overcomes all difficulties. It will be a grand triumph  to free Hindoos from the snares of these knaves, who pass by the polite names of  Mantra Shastris and Upasakas but who deserve to be denounced as enemies to all  that is decent, virtuous, and moral.  

What follows this remarkable preface is an introduction that names dozens of  groups who are seemingly indiscriminately lumped together into this category of  "Vami" or left-hand practitioner, followed by an anthology of some two hundred  pages of Sanskrit and Gujarati.  

These twin texts are follow-up companions to an initial volume entitled Ni bandha Samgraha, which unfortunately has not surfaced in any repository we can  locate. Based on the title and vague references in the following texts, we infer that  it reflects an initial commitment to a defense of the rational injunctions of religion,  in which the Nigama Prakasa, with its generally Vaisnava orientation, represents  the salvageable dimension of Hindu practice, and the Agama Prakasa, with its  Saiva, Sakta, Natha, and general tantrika orientation, that which is despicable.  Whether they were conceived originally as a set or logically grew from the initial  argument is impossible to say, although the latter is most probable because of the  exclusively backward reference; that is, the title page of the Agama Prakasa refers  only to the author of the Nigama Prakasa, which in turn only refers to the (for  us) anonymous Nibandha Prakasa. But we do have a probable author in the figure  of one Gopal Rao Hari Devmukh, whose name appeared on the title page of a  translation of the Agama Prakasa in a handwritten manuscript. There are very few  additional clues to the authorship or dates, save the following.  

Based on a single explicit intertextual reference in the Agama Prakasa to a  datable text, the Sanskrit Siksapatri (Shikshapatri) of Swaminarayan published in  1826, it seems reasonable to conclude that the texts were compiled in the mid 

nineteenth century, not long before their publication, but they may well have  been circulated before printing, as inferred from the simultaneous publication  dates. Swaminarayan's Siksapatri features a pro-Vaisnava, anti-advaita and anti tantrika polemic (for example, it implies that the philosopher Sahkara was a tan trika), but is equally critical of brahman priests, particularly those who prescribe  expensive rituals, which are precisely the two overriding themes of the twin vol umes by our (tentatively identified) anonymous author. Those texts deemed re-

THE ANONYMOUS AGAMA PRAKASA 269  

liable by the Siksapatri are the very ones so deemed in the Nigama Prakasa, and  vice versa for the Agama Prakasa, suggesting that the author of our text is a  follower of this important new tradition. This Swaminarayan connection is sig nificant, because the group was seen as a reforming agent of Gujarati society, both  by locals and by British administrators and clergy. Followers of Swaminarayan  were opposed to animal sacrifice, forbidden to consume liquor or meat, sing  vulgar songs, engage in practices for the appeasement of ghosts or evil spirits,  and were strictly forbidden to participate in sexual rituals. The Swaminarayan  religion was progressive in that the group was open to all castes, even though  caste hierarchies were still observed, and the group came out strongly against the  practice of sati (widow burning) and female infanticide, while promoting widow  remarriage and allowing women to take formal vows of renunciation. The urge  to reform, however, is not simply the outgrowth of the colonial project but has  deep roots in the Hindu traditions.  

Since the emergence of the devotional cults of the early centuries of the first  millennium, the orthoprax vaidika and smarta rituals have come under criticism  from those who have argued that the meaning and point of the rituals was no  longer known, and therefore that the rituals were performed out of ignorance,  inviting karmic and other forms of disaster for all who participated. With the  resurgence of vernacular devotionalism in the premodern, precolonial, era, the  critique extended to include sincerity of religious feeling, that is, devotion (bhakti).  In the nineteenth century, the Western conception of religious hypocrisy, coupled  with a sweeping indictment of all that could not be defended rationally or sci entifically, brought these ongoing critiques together in works such as the Agama  Prakasa.  

The criticism was two-pronged: the first was aimed at those brahman ritualists  who, in the arrogance of their ignorance, were accused of perpetuating a mean ingless ritual system that took advantage of the ordinary Hindu to no positive  end, producing a parasitic (and therefore useless, but not debased) class of priests.  The second target was the group of practitioners (not limited to priests) who,  seeing only gain and pleasure for themselves, debauched the rituals to include  sexual indulgences and other unseemly activities transgressive of ordinary social  sanction, such as drinking liquor and eating meat - the so-called "left-handed"  practitioners of Tantra. What was criticized first was the arcane and the secret,  for both groups depended on the inability of their participants to fathom the  mysteries of their liturgies. This accounts for some, at least, of the groupings of  individuals castigated by the author of the Agama Prakasa: Nathas and Saktas  were connected to propounders of Vedic lore (sastris), household priests (pandi 

tas), and hired performers for specialized, often magical, rituals (mantrikas). The  texts are similarly grouped, with Tantras and Rahasyas finding a place beside the  Vedic Brahmanas, Upanisads, and Sutras.  

Clearly, the Agama Prakasa's critique of Indian religion has strong links to the  past, but it also reflects the climate of British colonial rule, which gave its impulse  a greater social claim and a much wider audience, aided not only by the intro-

270 ROBI N RINEHAR T AND TONY K. STEWART  

duction of the printing press (a vernacular press was established in Ahmedabad  in 1845) and improved systems of travel and communication but also by the  adoption of institutional models from Western organizations such as the Young  Men's Christian Association, which was active throughout India. The new insti 

tution of the vernacular newspaper and the inexpensively printed pamphlet and  book (such as the Agama Prakasa) provided powerful input to the increasingly  vocal public arena, which was marked by organized lectures and debates among  traveling religious leaders. New popular Indian religious leaders (many of whom  who were educated in schools run by Christian missionaries) incorporated many  of the colonial social issues directly into their platforms; because the public debate  was shaped in forums often conforming to Western sensibilities, the terms of that  discourse were not entirely in the control of locals. These religious figures occa sionally adopted stances as a show of solidarity with their British rulers, but in  other instances they advocated reform to show that any necessary changes in  Hindu practice could be implemented from within the tradition itself, with no  need for outside assistance - a position that reflected independence, pride, and  an emergent nationalism.  

Our text seems on the surface to be sympathetic to British rule, for the author  is keen to show that the tantrika practices he finds so despicable are most prev alent in the princely states ruled by Indian kings, and not those areas under direct  British rule. Such sympathy was typical of the mid- to late nineteenth centuries,  before an organized movement for independence from the British got underway.  But it should be noted that elsewhere he labels Bengal, which at the time of  composition was the capital of British India, to be the hotbed of debauched prac tices, the stronghold of mantra-sastra, which he labels "Bengali vidya" (arcane  knowledge of Bengal). His zeal for religious reform is coupled with a strong na tionalist proposal - a unified nation working together to cleanse the religion of  its excesses - but his sentiment often spills over into a ready regionalism tied  both to language and locale. In the opening pages of his introduction, he claims  to know of no more than two, or at most, four hundred men who practice these  left-handed rituals in his own locale of Ahmedabad. Yet when one travels so far  as Banaras, the figure jumps to the thousands, and when one ventures to the  edges of India, to Dravida in the south (especially Kerala), to Kashmir in the  north, and most of all to Bengal in the east - that is, away from the heartland of  Hindu India defined by Ahmedabad as its center - the practitioners are numbered  in the millions. The tendency to exoticize those who are "not like us," that is, the  projection of an "other," is a common feature of this indictment.  

Although these characterizations may seem somewhat unsophisticated in light  of our most recent reconstructions of India's religious heritage, they were part of  a larger nineteenth-century effort to map and catalog the full terrain of Indian  religious cultures. Importantly, this effort included the "scientific" control of pop 

ulations through the enumerations of the census, which tracked religious affilia tions (and in cases of an ambiguous response, assigned one). It became the task  of many religious writers to ground their critiques in enumerative, if not statistical,THE ANONYMOUS ACAMA PRAKASA 271  

analysis. The surprising pluralism that emerged from such analyses was quick to  be characterized in starkly delineated terms, because the categories that these  rulers and reformers erected were exclusive in ways that reflected, at the very  lowest level, the census taker's inability to check two boxes at once. As such, it  revealed a predilection for exclusive "group membership" as the defining feature  of identity (an individual could not have two identities at once), whereas it appears  that individuals who participated in these traditions did not always follow this  exclusionary approach. As religious identities became politicized in the latter  stages of the nineteenth century, thought and rational assent were given unprec edented priority over action in categorizing "proper" religion in India, and mem 

bership in a clearly defined "group" was a prerequisite for being counted. With  a litmus test of a self-articulated "purity," the response of many reform groups,  including the Swaminarayan, was to accept specific texts and practices as repre sentative of a "true" Hinduism while declaring others debased or degenerate forms  of religion, and in many cases not even Hindu at all. The author of our text  adopted a similar strategy as he brought to light not only the "filthy, infernal, and  obscene superstitions" of the tantrika tradition, but also the Vedic texts previously  kept secret as "a special privilege of the brahmanas."  

Although it is common nowadays to think of the texts and practices of Tantra  as shrouded in secrecy because of their connection with transgressive activities,  our text reminds us that the recitation and rituals associated with the Vedas were  an equally mysterious arena for those who were not brahman males trained in  Vedic tradition. Indeed the stated aim of many of the translated versions of San 

skrit texts printed in the nineteenth century (including our text) was to make  them available to those who otherwise had no access to them. Reformers argued  that many Hindus were ignorant of their own religious tradition, and that the best  path to religious reform was for them to study the proper texts and subsequently  bring their practices into conformity with the texts, and thereby to rationalize  those practices. Essential to this argument was a reading of Indian history that  posited an initial golden age of religious purity and consistency (typically the age  of the Vedas) followed by a period in which religious knowledge fell into the  hands of a small group of brahmans who either inadvertently or through greed  and corruption gradually forgot the true meaning of the Vedas, causing the tra dition to enter a lengthy period of degeneration. Our author, along with others  who subscribed to this model of India's religious history, saw the decline of an  "original" Hindu tradition as responsible for the spread of Buddhism throughout  India, which in turn led the god Siva to institute the sensual practices of Tantra  as a radical antidote to the ascetic, world-negating tendencies of Buddhism. The  conflict engendered by trying to exalt the ancient while indicting it forced the  author of the Agama Prakasa to restate his position, according to context. Thus  he believed it essential that the secrets of the Vedas and other texts deemed  acceptable be revealed so that people could bring their practices into conformity  with them, even as he sought to reveal the secrets of Tantra in order that that  their practice be eradicated. Where those secrets were mixed (misra) with Vedic 

272 ROBI N RINEHAR T AND TONY K. STEWAR T  

secrets, problems abounded. We should note that this purported "secrecy" is as  much a rhetorical device as a reflection of reality, for our author himself had been  able to learn of this "secret" in extenso (although his translator seems a bit unsure  from time to time, so we might infer the that the details were not widely known  in spite of the general recognition), and he asserts that at least one-fourth of the  people in every city of India practiced it (sometimes even publicly), making it a  very well-known secret indeed. Importantly, and contrary to many of our con temporary characterizations of Tantra, our author routinely highlights secrecy  over sexual indulgence as the dominant trope of these practices.  

The argument for the eradication of tantrika practices, by Indian and British  reformers alike, singled out those aspects of it which they found the most trou bling to a modern society on moral grounds. The consumption of liquor and  meat, and participation in sexual rituals, were often paired with ignorance and a  laxity of discipline as the source of the problem. This strategy was clearly evi denced in the introduction to the Agama Prakasa, as the author acknowledged a  wide variety of texts and practices from different regions of India but lumped  them together as a "sect" known as the Vamamarga ("left-hand path"), Tantra marga, or Kaulamarga, whose adherents were united in their practice of "despi cable" and "immoral" rituals, whether they had any historical connection or not  Our text is thus part of a larger nineteenth-century trend toward conceiving of a  new entity called "Tantrism" as a specific modality of Indian religious experience,  where previously these groups would have remained categorically distinct.  

The printed edition of this text, which is probably not its original publication,  can be found under the full title Exposition of the Agamas or that Portion of Hindoo  Shastras, which Vamees or Left Hand Sect Follow as Their Books of Revelation, i.e.  Tantras, Vamalas, Rujusias, &c. for the Use of Reformers in India, by the Author of  the "Nigama Prakash"; the Gujarati title is simply Agama Prakasa etale Tantrika  Dharmano Knulaso. Both title pages indicate the publisher to be Sumsher Bahadoor  in Ahmedabad, with the imprint dates of 1874 C.E. and Samvat 1930. The trans 

lation of the preface comes from a ninety-six-page manuscript purchased in an  antiquarian book stall in London by Stewart in 1997. The bound and undated  anonymous translation - done in a hand that suggests English schoolboy edu cation - the first part of what would have covered at least four volumes, was  copied on rag bond with the watermark "M and J Lay 1817," with the putative  

original author named on the verso of the endpaper that serves as a title page.  We have transcribed the anonymous English translation of the preface to the  Agama Prakasa, checking every line against the printed text, preserving its some what awkward phrasing, but editing inconsistencies in transliteration, and sup plementing with glosses those phrases the translator chose not to translate, either  out of frustration with the long lists or out of a healthy respect for those places  where the original author's understanding far exceeded his own. The translator's  glosses appear in parentheses and our glosses appear in brackets. Hyphenation  of technical terms generally follows the translator's original, which, along with 

T HE ANONYMOU S ACAMA PRAKASA 273  

his choice of vocabulary, suggests a heavy reliance on Monier-Williams's 1899  Sanskrit-English Dictionary. We have retained the translator's preference for capi talizing proper names or titles. Our transcription preserves the paragraph breaks  of the original Gujarati text, which, as readers will surely note, is somewhat hap hazardly organized, and shifts from gross generalizations appropriate to an in experienced reader to the advanced technical descriptions of ritual and practice.  A second editor's hand can be detected in our translation manuscript, and those  suggested changes have been routinely incorporated without comment, since it  appears that the translation was at one time intended for publication, although it  appears that never occurred.  

Further Reading  

For good introductions to the religious movements of the nineteenth century, see  Kenneth W. Jones, Socio-religious Reform Movements in British India (Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press, 1989) and Raymond Brady Williams, A New Face of  Hinduism: The Swaminarayan Religion (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,  1984). For the scholastic constructions of India, see Ronald B. Inden, Imagining  India (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1990), and for religious identity as political iden tity, see Kenneth W. Jones, "Religious Identity and the Indian Census," in The  Census in British India: New Perspectives, edited by N. Gerald Barrier (Delhi: Ma nohar, 1981), pp. 73-101; and Barnard S. Cohn, "The Census, Social Structure  and Objectification in South Asia," in An Anthropologist among the Historians and  Other Essays (Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1990), pp. 224-54. For comparison  as a basis of category formation in religion, see Jonathan Z. Smith, "Adde Parvum  Parvo Magnus Acervus Erit," History of Religions 11.1 (August 1971): 67-90; and  for a critique of the concept of group inclusion as the primary marker of identity,  see Tony K. Stewart, "Alternate Structures of Authority: Satya Pir on the Frontiers  of Bengal," in David Gilmartin and Bruce B. Lawrence, eds., Beyond Muslim and  

Hindu: Rethinking Religious Identity in Islamicate South Asia, 1200-1800 (Gainesville:  University of Florida, in press).  

Explanation of Agamas (or Tantras or Vamamarga)  

Translated from the Agama-Prakasa of Gopal Rao Hari Devmukh  

PREFACE  

Agama-sastra is called the Mantra-sastra; and it is also known as the Vama marga, the Tantra-marga and the Kaula-marga. This sect advocates the three  doctrines, viz., action or sacrificial rites, worship, and knowledge; there are  books written on the subject and Siva is regarded as their author; there are also  other books to the same effect and they are composed by the Natha-sectarians  and they inculcate the ceremonies called nydsa [imputation of mantras to dif-

274 ROBI N RINEHAR T AND TONY K. STEWAR T  

ferent body parts in order to sanctify], mudra [gestures], japa [chanting], and  puja [worship] as well as the worship of the different gods, and goddesses,  Bhairava, etc. These people repeat the pancanga [five modes of devotion] which  includes [prayers such as the] sahasra-nqma, stavaraja, kavaca, hrdaya, and  panjara. There is also another ceremony called the Purascarana which is ob 

served in connection with the various gayatns [verses] and mantras [utter ances]. One has to be initiated, before he is admitted into this sect and that  ceremony is called the purnabhiseka and the pattabhiseka. It is said that the  sound "soham" is made 21,600 times while inhaling and exhaling and this  process is [named] japajapa and ajapajapa. There are many treatises on the  subject of the Sakta worship; in some places the Vedic hymns are also used  [but] the actions are quite different from the Vedic. The different actions are  the worship of damanaka (jackal), the sacrifice of diitf (female go-between),  the worship of a virgin, of a female ascetic, and of hair, the placing of a vessel  and the making of a thread. The books are called the Tantra and Rahasya; some  are known as the Yamala and Amnaya, while others are named the Kalpa. All  these books, if collected, will be equal in number to the Vedas, the Sastras and  the Puranas. Some ceremonies are mentioned to gain the desired objects and  to reduce, to sicken, kill or ruin an adversary (jarana, marana, and chattan).  Intoxicating drinks, flesh, fish, and women are necessarily required in all these  ceremonies. Flesh and fish are consecrated and placed in a plate and afterwards  the devotees partake of the food. It is mentioned in the Tantra books that the  spiritous liquors ceased to be drunk, as Brahma, Krsna and Sukra cursed them  all, but that there is no sin in drinking them after removing the curse by some  peculiar ceremony. There are some technical terms in the Tantra which contain  bija [seed] mantras of one word only. The ways of such men as are versed in  this Mantra-sastra are quite different; they have their own distinct years,  months, days, astronomical divisions of time, worship, sraddha [ceremony for  deceased relatives], guru-tarpana [libations to gods and ancestors], precepts  and general ceremonies. The books on the subject are also different in various  countries. The Gauda-patha [the reading proper to Bengal] and the Gurjara patha [reading proper to Gujarat] are different from one another on account  of the different countries in which they are accepted. The principal treatise on  the subject is the Candl-patha which is included in the Markandeya Purana as  well as in the Katyayani-tantra. Taking this book to be an authority, the dev otees perform the sacrifices, marjana [rite of purification], tarpana [libations  to gods and ancestors], japa, etc. by reciting [praise of the goddess in the forms  of] haracandi, satacandi and sahasracandi. The ten Mahavidyas [personifica 

tions of the saktis or powers of Siva] are regarded as the principal goddesses  in the Tantras. There are many books which give description of sacrificial  receptacles or pits and pavilions called the hunda [latrine?] and mandapa re spectively; and all this system is attributed to Mahadeva [Siva]. Some people  recognize three distinct features of these ceremonies, viz. Vaidiki [Vedic], Tan triki, [Tantric] and Misra [combined]; Misra is that in which Tantriki and 

THE ANONYMOUS AGAMA PRAKASA 27 5  

Vaidiki are used together. It is difficult to separate from the Tantras the part  promiscuously accepted by the Brdhmanas [brahmans] in their religious rites.  Various Tantras and Mantras art found in the Daksina [southern]-marga. From  this, it appears that the Brdhmanas did not differ from the Tantra-marga. Had  there been any difference of opinion, they would not have taken anything from  the Tantras; but, that is not the case: the Tantra-marga that is to say, Kaula marga is prevalent in many parts of India. The Brahmacaris, Sannyasts, Para 

mahamsa Panditas and many other people belong to this sect in every city and  town, but their ways of life are kept very secret and hence it is that they are  not brought to light. It is after a long search that we have come to know  something about them. About two or four hundred men are connected with  the Sakta-mdrga in Ahmadabad and in the same way there are many in Nadiyad,  Baroda, Broach, Surat, Puna, Satara and Karbir; thousands of Brdhmanas follow  the Sakta-marga in Benares, while in Bengal, and the Dravidian countries mil lions are found; wherever there is a temple of the Devi, there this system is in  vogue and liquor and meats are offered to the various goddesses, viz, Bechraji,  Ambaji, Kalaka, Hinglaj, Tuljapura, Vindhyavasini, Kamaksi, Matapura, and  Kali of Calcutta. The Vaisnavas despised all liquors and meats and they there 

fore do not go to such places, but the Gosavis, Atitas and the Natha sectarians  do go there. It is clearly mentioned in the Siksapatri of the Svaminarayana that  no one should salute a god to whom liquors and meats are offered; the followers  of this sect do not make a bow to such a god but many of them have faith (in  those gods) in order to serve their purpose. In native states, the Mantra-s'astras  are employed to perform some mystical ceremonies. There is not a single native  state which does not engage such men and spend lakhs of rupees on these  peculiar ceremonies.  

The object of this book is to show what Agama-sastra is, what particular  gods are worshipped, and what the names of the books and the technicalities  are; the names of the authors of the various books, the mudras, the mystical  powers of accomplishment and bija, etc., are mentioned in this book. The Vedic  and the Tantrika ceremonies are these days mixed together to a very large  extent but in the original books of the Vedas there is not such a mixture; no  traces of the Tantrika ceremonies are found in the Brahmana and the Sutra  works but they were introduced into the Karma-marga by the later Prayoga karas. If we examine the present system of the Brahmanical sandhya [daily  rites], we find that the nyasa, mudra, dsana [posture] and arghyapraddna [ritual  presentation of water] etc., are taken from the Tantras, the Pranayamas [breath 

ing exercises] from the Yogasastra, japa and upasthana [worship] from the  Vedas and the repetition of the names and praises (nama-smarana) from the  Puranas. It is difficult to separate and classify all this. In the same way, there  are other Tantrik ceremonies, viz, kunda, mandapa vidhi, laghunyasa, and ma 

hasodhanyasa.  

It is said that the pioneers of this system were the nine Nathas and eighty four Siddhas. It appears from the thousands of books on the subject that this 

276 ROBI N RINEHAR T AND TONY K. STEWAR T  

work was carried on long ago and that the Brahmanas were not opposed to it,  because many people believe that a follower of this sect pleases god and gratifies  all his desires by the virtue of the mantras. It can be inferred from the  Sankaravijaya [a biography of the Advaita Vedanta philosopher Sahkara] that  Sahkaracarya was also a Sakta, for the worship of cakra [meditative wheel;  bodily center of energy; chiromantic circle; zodiac?] is highly praised in that  book, and because the cakra is found in the Shin-geri and Dvarka [monasteries]  established by him; this sytem therefore existed before Sahkaracarya. The opin ion of some people is that, when Buddha appeared, all men became ascetics by  his precepts; so much so that they would not marry, fight or cultivate the land;  there being no government, all worldly affairs ceased; some people left every 

thing aside and observed fasting days and thought that they would attain to  salvation by dying in that state. At that time, Siva instituted the Kaula-marga  to set the people to worldly affairs, and allowed them to use liquors and meats  freely, and determined that the woman was the only supreme deity. It is said  in the Bhdgavata Purana [4.2.2]: "Let the foolish and impure men who wear  long hair, apply ashes and carry bones, be admitted in the Siva-dfksa (religious  rites, initiation etc. of Siva) in which intoxicating drinks is held sacred or  divine." The two chapters of the Padma Purana are devoted to the origin of  pakhanda or heretical doctrines and it is said by Siva therein that the Kaula  system was made to pollute people. Perhaps, these statements are made by the  Vaisnavas themselves, but it appears that this system followed Buddhism and  that it was carried on for a very long time, because, how can one account  otherwise for thousands of books which treat of the said system?  

Afterwards, [the philosopher] Kumarilabhatta insisted on the Vedic rites  inculcated by the Purva-mimamsa and after including some ceremonies in  which many animals were killed, and which were intended for the attainment  of the desired objects, he settled that salvation can only be obtained by per 

forming religious ceremonies. This system lasted for some time as well and  afterwards, there appeared Sahkaracarya who revised the Uttara Mimamsa and  declared that the atma [individual spirit] was brahma[n] and that salvation or  absolution could not be obtained by performing karman or religious rites but  by knowledge. According to him knowledge is superior; heaven is the fruit of  observing religious rites [karman] but one cannot have salvation thereby. The  system of the Vedanta bears in many respects a very close resemblance to that  of the Kaula. (The Kaula is called Rajyayoga.) The yoga system of Patanjali is  called Hathayoga while the Vedanta is known as Jnanayoga, while the system  which is advocated in the Gita is termed Karma-yoga. The difference amongst  the four systems is that one gets salvation, according to the Rajyayoga, by  enjoyment, while the Hathayoga declares that he should desire to obtain final  beatitude by performing religious austerities, viz, samddhi (mortifying the  body, etc.); the Jnanayoga recommends asceticism and the Karmayoga suggests  that absolution can be had by performing ritual actions (karman) advocated  by the varnasrama [classical system of caste, life stages, and goals]. There is a 

THE ANONYMOUS AGAUA PRAKASA 277  

story in the Padma Purana, which affirms that Siva will manifest himself in  order to propagate heretical doctrines (pakhanda). Now some people ascribe  this statement to the Vamamarga, while the Vaisnavas say that it is applicable  to Sankaracarya because the latter was a great heretic in calling the personal  soul (atma or jivatma) brahma[n]. This is the opinion of the Vaisnavas belong 

ing to the Madhva-sampradaya [followers of Dvaita Vedanta teachings of  Madhva]. The Vaisnavas of all denominations believe that atma (personal  "soul") is not brahma[n] but that it is an object created by brahma who is its  master and whose service is its duty. All doctrines opposed to this are called  heretical. According to the Kaulika-marga, the atma is Brahma-rupa [in the  body or form of brahma] - and all those who do not belong to that sytem are  termed Pasu and Kantaka (beasts and thorns). It also asserts that all prescribed  rules and prohibitions should not be followed and that one should act inde pendently without any restraint. The system of religion of the sannyasi Para 

mahamsa as well as of the Aghoris is identical with that of the followers of the  Vama-marga. In these times, many Aghoris are not found but formerly there  were many; they used to live in forests and partake of urine and excrement.  Near Siddhapur, there is a village called Avaghadasthali where dwelt the head  of the Aghoris; he used to catch scorpions, small lizards and other animals and  then place them in a pot and, when they were naturally decayed, he would  drink their extracted juice from the skull of a dead man and after throwing  their bones away, bring other animals. Some people eat the flesh of corpses  while they are being burnt and others take out the dead body of a woman from  the grave and make asana [i.e., mount it] in the burial ground in order to  accomplish their mystical powers. A guard is always kept in a graveyard that  none may tamper with dead bodies; there is a saying current among the people  that a mantrasastri or one versed in mystical science has power to snatch away  the bodies of the Dheda or the Bhanghi clan from the smaiana [cremation  ground].  

Many immoral and horrible practices which are contrary to the DharmaSastra  (the science of law or morality etc.) are advocated by the Mantra-sastra. As a  rule the followers of this system worship various incarnations of the form of  Siva and Sakti, and thinking that the power of the Vedic hymns has ceased but  that of the Tantrika is still in force, they observe this form of worship and  believe that Visnu is in the form of Sakti. There are many stories in the Puranas  giving the origin of the worship of Siva and Sakti in the form of the male and  female generative organs (lihgam yoni [respectively]). This worship of the gen erative organs is taken from the Tantras, because they not only mention it  clearly but also the Pancamakara [five Ms] containing kunda [menstrual blood]  and golamata [semen], etc.; as it seems to be a Tantrika custom, the Vaisnavas  do not worship Siva nor do they take the Tlrtha-prasada (of Siva); they only  salute the image of Siva. The religious ceremonies (karma-kanda) observed in  the Vama-marga are quite different. The followers of this sect perform very  secretly the non-Vedic ceremonies, viz, the pratasmarana (morning prayer), 

278 ROBIN RINEHART AND TONY K. STEWART  

snanaviddhi (ceremony of bathing), tripundra-dhdrana (making marks with red  or white powder on the forehead etc.), bhu-suddhi (purification of the earth),  bhiita-suddhi (purification of animals), pranayama (restraining the breath), san dhya (morning and evening prayers), japa, (muttering certain syllables of  phrases), purascarana [preparatory rite], karanganasa [nyasa of the elephant's  trunk?], antaramatrika [internal mystical diagrams], bahirmatrika [external  mystical diagrams], citranyasa [placement of symbolic diagrams on body], na thadividya [supreme knowledge of the Nathas], mulavidya [knowledge of the  root or base], nityadividya [knowledge of the eternal], tattvanyasa [imputation  of metaphysical truths?], dvara-puja [worship of the opening], tarpana [liba tions], dasa-vidyanyasa [imputation of the ten goddesses], patra-nirnaya [re moval of the vessel], nitya-puja [daily worship], suryarghya [offering to the  sun], tirtha-samskara [pilgrimage rites], gurvadi-pujana [worship of the guru,  etc.], diksha [initiation], prayascitta [rituals of atonement], nimba-puspa-pujd  [worship of the sexual organ of a young virgin], damanaka-puja, vasanta-pujd  [spring-worship of Sitala(?)], sri-cakra-puja [worship of the mystical sricakra  diagram of masculine and feminine united], diksa-kala [the black consecra tion], diksabheda [consecration of non-differentiation], sarvatobhadra [square  diagram], punydha-vacana [proclamation of auspiciousness], nandi-sraddha  [offerings to ancestors], kurma-cakra [diagram in shape of a tortoise], nava  yoni [sexual organ of a prepubescent girl], kaula-sraddha [rite for the Kaulas],  mantra-sodhana [purification through mantras], mantroddhdra [selection of  mantras], natha-parayana [knowledge of the Natha system], tattva-parayana  [study of metaphysics], nama-parayana [study of the names], pancanyasa [five  nyasas noted above], mahasodha-nyasa [nyasa of great purification], maha-ny asa [great nyasa], sammohana-nyasa [nyasa of bewitching], saubhagya-vardha na-nyasa [nyasa of increasing good fortune], antyesthi [funeral sacrifice], &c.  

There is a place of Bhairavanatha, in Kakaria at Ahmedabad and the cere monies peculiar to the Vama-marga are observed there; such places are found  in every city. The ceremonial consists in making some gestures with the hands  called mudrds. There are many mudras, viz, maccha-mudra (gesture in the form  of a fish), kurma-mudra (a gesture in the form of a tortoise), kusa (sacred grass),  tarksa (bird or Garuda), dhenu (a cow), vidravani (literally act of defeating),  vasakari (subduing), khecari (moving in heavens), bona (an arrow), pasa (a  snare), musala (a pestle, a club &c), sankha (a conch-shell), haustubha (a jewel  found from the ocean [jewel worn by Krsna]), srivatsa (a particular mark or  curl on the breast of Visnu or Krsna.) &c. [These are all marks of the worship  of Krsna.] The Saktas have a different mark (tilaka) on the forehead and a line  of red powder is produced between the eyes; when two Saktas meet they make  presents of liquors, meats, and fish, but, as they do such things very privately,  no one knows who a Sakta is. Many Sastris, Pandits, Vidiyas (those who learn  the Vedas by heart), householders, Sannyasis, Paramahamsas, and other people  belong to this system of Vdma-marga. Some say that they can convert wine  into milk and show it to others in the form of milk and fish as bananas by the 

THE ANONYMOUS AGAMA PRAKASA 27 9  

virtue of their mystical powers. They have pretensions or claims to magic to a  very great extent. It is said that the king Gopicanda abandoned his kingdom  and his queens through listening to the precepts of Macchendranatha (Mat syendra-natha) and that in the same way Goraksanatha (Gorakhanath) made  dead men alive.  

The followers of the Vama-marga do not salute any other gods except Devi  (goddess) and Siva. They say that gods and men perish if they bow down to  them (gods), that the vaitala [vampires], bhutas (evil spirits), yaksas, yaksanis  [male and female class of tree-dwelling spirits], Datta, Hanuman and all other  gods are ready at their service, and that they can kill and make any one sick  or mad. The credulous and ignorant people take all this for truth. At Benares,  there was a certain Sakta, named Bhaskaracarya who is author of many books.  Once upon a time, he was not invited to a dinner party by some gentlemen  and the consequence was that all the food cooked for other persons was  changed into a dirty substance or excrement; but the tradition says that, when  Narayana Diksita Patanakara saluted Bhaskaracarya and took him to his house,  all the dirt assumed the form of the original food. The same man (Bhaskara carya) carried bottles of liquors on the back of an elephant and gave a spirituous  bath to the Kasi-Visvesvara ([Siva lihgam] of Benares) together with a grand  procession. Even in these days, some Brahmanas sprinkle the water extracted  from the bhanga [hashish] on the image of Siva; the king Sivaji of Deccan had  a preceptor named Ganesadeva who got a temple built in a sacred place called  Makuli; his system is now followed in Satara, while that of Bhaskaracarya is  prevalent in Benares. According to the Saktas, no worship of any sort can be  observed without liquors, meats, eggs and women. As the pancagavya [five  products of the cow], which consists of five things, viz, cow dung, urine, milk,  ghee and curds, is taken according to the Vedic rites to perform a penance for  

the bodily purification, in the same way, liquors are drunk and used for mor gana [rites of request]. The religious ceremonies called the dlksa, sraddha, puja,  antyesti &c cannot be performed without intoxicating drinks. The liquors,  meats and fish are called Tirtha (sacred waters [fords]), suddhi (purification)  and kadali (a deer &c) respectively. It is mentioned in the Tantra-sastra that  liquors are considered extremely pure and that Devi (goddess) is pleased be yond measure, if any one would partake of them. Some portion of the Sanskrit  text is attached to this book, which when read will clearly show the import of  the subject. It will not be worthwhile to give meaning of all the Sanskrit pas sages, as a specimen, a few of them are translated in the first part.  

This book is intended for those men who wish to make a religious reform (dhar mani sudharana), and they should think of its merits and demerits.  Some Brdhmanas are upasakas (worshippers [conductors of worship]) from  times immemorial; they observe the worship (upasana) in their family from  generation to generation; some kings become the pupils of the Brahmanas  versed in the mystical science and believe that they will be greatly benefitted  thereby. Ganesa-sastri of Nasik was the religious chief (danadhyaksa) of Gaik-

280 ROBI N RINEHAR T AND TONY K. STEWAR T  

war Malhavara and was publicly recognised as an upasaka (worshipper). Some  prime-ministers of the Baroda State also belonged to this sect, and, as a rule,  the native states have many such men. Sivajivas[?] Maharaja had a mason,  named Ladaba-bhagata from Deccan, as well as four or five Brahmanas who  were Dravidas [from the south]; they showed some mystical tricks to the Ma 

haraja and he gave them a jagir or property worth a lakh of rupees and paid  money to build a temple. As many men are patronised by the kings, this system  is carried on without any detention. Every city has one-fourth part of its popu lation as Saktas - and the ceremonies are performed very secretly in the middle  of the night; if a king be a supporter, they are also observed publicly. It is very  curious to see that, in case a Brahmana is accused of drinking spirituous liquors,  the men who drink always are considered pure or virtuous and they themselves  insist on giving prayascitta [rites of atonement] to that man accused. It is  said: - The world is deceived in the broad day light by those cheats who pre tend to be omniscient, initiated (diksita), agnidava (having a great conflagration  by fire), knowers of Brahma[n] (God) and observers of religious austerities,  and who while away the nights of the full moon at the houses of harlots, in  enjoying pleasures characterised by profound love and fragrant mouthful of  liquors.  

When a country is characterised by dark, gloomy, thick, blind, and terrible  ignorance, heresy is considered a religion and a true religion is regarded as  heresy (pakhanda), while the credulous people are deceived by their cunning  preceptors. Formerly, there was the Vedic religion in this Gujarat, and it was  followed by the Sravaka, Vama-marga, Siva, and Vaisnava religions succes 

sively. It is said in the Mahiman stotra to this effect: "The Vedic, the Samkhya,  the Yoga, the Pasupati (Saiva) and the Vaisnava systems (came out after the  other)."  

All of these religions are now lost in oblivion and no one knows what his religion  is. The native princes and their subjects are sinking into ignorance; there are no  schools and teachers to impart religious instruction, and, as all religious books are  written in the Sanskrit language, no one knows their import; thus truth (artha) is  confounded with untruth (anartha) and the wicked and deceitful men serve their  selfish motives.  

Some modern Vedias (those who learn the Vedas by heart) and Josis (as trologers) say that they are upasakas (worshippers) and that the Devi (goddess)  is pleased with them; the kings do not take medicine from them unless they  (Vedias) say so. When such statements are made, the princes think that the  Devi is kind to those men and that they will be cured of the disease; these  (credulous) fellows are initiated by the Sastris, Panditas, and Mantrikas (versed  in the mystical science) who are regarded as their preceptors (gurus); they  believe that they will be greatly benefitted by tying talismans prepared by those  mystical men with coals (angara, yantra, tavija).  

The Mantra-Sastra is also called the Bengali Vidya (the learning of Bengal),  because the Gauda Brahmanas of Bengal used to come to Gujarata and DeccanTHE ANONYMOUS ACAMA PRAKASA 281  

and circulate there the mystical books (mantra-sastra-grantha), a large number  of which are even now found in Bengal and Kerala; they have not yet come to  this side. In Gujarata, temples dedicated to Kalika (kalika-sthapana) are found  in Dabhoi, Pavagadha, Ahamadabad, and Patana. The Bengali Brahmonas vis 

ited this country in the times of the Hindu kings and made some pupils; they  circulated some books and introduced Kalika. The killing of various animals  is sanctioned by the books on the Mantra-Sastra, but no mention is made any where about killing cows, though it is mentioned in many places in the Vedas;  from this it appears that the prohibition of killing cows was made in the Kali yuga or the iron age and that the Mantra-sastra came into existence afterwards.  The devotees or advocates of the last mentioned system require necessarily a  secluded place and sakti (literally power) that is to say a woman in all the  ceremonies (anusthana). The five makaras (beginning with madya, mamsa,  mina, mudra, and maithuna) [liquor, meat, fish, grain, and sexual intercourse]  are also called prathama (first), dvitiya (second), tritiya (third), caturthi  (fourth), and pancaml (fifth) respectively. In case all objects be not secured,  the ceremony is observed by taking the single prathama (madya = liquor);  if two or three things be had, they are only used in performing the rites.  The pancaml (fifth, viz, maithuna = cohabitation) is considered as amrta (nec tar or immortal[ity]) and it is produced from sakti (power = woman); and  hence it is that cohabitation with the woman is termed yajna (sacrifice) or the  dutiyaga.  

Siva is regarded as the founder (acarya) of this sytem. Now the question  arises why Siva should produce or advocate heresy (pakhanda), as all the books  treating of the Tantra-marga are said to be authorised by Siva. There is a logical  maxim [in Sanskrit] that even a fool does not move without having a special  object or aim in view. The meaning of the statement is even an idiot does not  do anything without some reason; what should be then the cause of such a  heresy (pakhanda); how did people believe in it and should we call him a god  or man who propagated a heretical system (pakhanda)!  

The Vama-marga is diametrically opposed to all religious or law books  (Dharma- sastra), morals and good customs. Not only do they not observe  caste-distinctions but they also disregard the marriage ceremonies. The men  and women perform the ceremony called the ghata-kancuki. Ghata-kancuki is  a peculiar and immoral rite according to which the bodices of different women  are placed in a pot and the men present at the ceremony are allowed one by  one to take out each bodice from it. Each then cohabits with the woman to  whom that particular bodice belongs. Any man takes any woman he happens  to find; the followers worship a naked woman and consider that they attain to  greater merit by getting a female of the Bhangina caste or one in her monthly  course. They worship her, eat the remainders of her food, and come into con tact with her; they do not observe any distinction between what should be  eaten and what should not be eaten, It is mentioned in the books of the Vama 

marga that one is highly benefitted by acting thus and taking this statement 

282 ROBI N RINEHAR T AND TONY K. STEWAR T  

into consideration, people join this sect (dharma). From this it appears that  there is no telling how mean one may become in the hope of deriving some  benefit; though he may be mistaken in his ideas as to right or wrong, still, as  soon as he sees some advantage, he does not shrink from committing the most  horrible deeds. All such men are naturally mean and wicked. There are indeed  many instances in history showing that a single man killed thousands of men,  burnt their city, committed dacoity, and put millions of people into an ocean  of misery for his own insignificant good. There have been instances, also, of  great men who made millions of people happy. Many efforts are necessary for  the nourishment and growth of man; no one would nourish the child of some  other person, even if thousands of rupees be offered but as God has given  instinct to the parents who nourish their children, this difficult task is attended  with success and thousands of men attain to maturity; their overgrowth be comes so very rapid that some of them cannot be supported, because many  men waste money in giving dinners and in marriage ceremonies and nourish  their children to no purpose. Good men are sorely wanting, but, if all parents  make their children virtuous, strong and useful, the world will abound in good  men. In these days, many useless people wander about for their livelihood and  are not afraid of acting in any way they like. The principle of education must  be such as would make men more useful and religious and must be accessible  to all men. As there was no education at all in this country many heretical  systems (pakhandas) took rise and people became wicked; their greatest exploit  is to quarrel and annoy one another. There is nothing like material confidence.  In a great kingdom like that of Baroda, the clerks, state-officials &c would envy  and destroy one another. Two men do not trust each other; that is their hearts  or thoughts are not in accord; in the same way the enmity inherent in the caste system has increased to such an extent that any reform is impossible. The  natives of this country are inferior even to the lower animals or beasts, because  they serve their selfish motives by ruining others; the enmity and wickedness  which they possess are not found even in beasts. When all this is considered,  it appears that the reasoning power vanished and futile learning (avidya) and  ignorance were on their increase. One should dispel foolishness (avidya ajnana) and propagate good and true religion.  

The tithis or days of a month are called tattva (essence) in the Devi-marga  while the days of a week are called natha (lord); there are thirty-six days in a  month and they are thus pronounced: "pha-mase, kha-yuge, pa-parivarte" (In  the month Pha, in the cycle Kha, in the year Pa). There are five paray anas, viz,  nityanatha (eternal lord), caturanga (four limbs), hamsa (a swan), cakra (a  wheel), deva (god), and their fruit is mentioned as follows [in Sanskrit from]  Saubhdgya-ratna-tantra: "The Nitya-parayana gives all accomplishments and  the Hamsa-parayana affords the highest object" (paramartha).  

The prefixes and suffixes called bijas are applied to some mantras. The man tra which is recited to gratify the desires is pronounced repeatedly, and this  repetition is called the samputi-patha. In the same way, when a Brahmana re-

THE ANONYMOUS ACAMA PRAKASA 283  

cites generally the candi (candi-patha) [glorification of the goddess Candi], he  receives two annas (3 pence) and if he were to repeat the samputi-patha with  all its ramifications, which is recited four times, he would charge eight annas  (one shilling) for every recitation. In the same way if he were to recite it nine  times, it would be called nava-candi and if hundred times, sata-candi. All these  actions are mentioned in the Tantras and though some Brahmanas censure the  Tantra-marga, still they observe the tantrika ceremonies. It is originally ar 

ranged that, if prayers are to be said to God or some other deity, they must be  offered from the mouth of a Brahmana; if a man of some other denomination  were to say such prayers, God or any other deity would not listen to them.  Prayers offered by a man of another caste do not become fruitful, therefore, if  men of any caste have to say prayers they must have them done through a  Brahmana who accords the merit or prayer to the sacrificer (yajamana). If a  child be born to some one in the mula asterism, the mula is appeased (mula  santi), that is to say a Brahmana is sent for and thus requested: "You say that  this child was born in the mula-asterism; sit and suggest some means to avoid  this danger." This ceremony is called "Varum." After the Brahmana is thus  requested, he makes avahana [invocation] of a particular deity mentioned in  the book which is intended for appeasing gods, or in other words, he invites  the god and appeases him by offering prayers (puja), japa, sacrifice, &c; the  sacrificer thinks that his difficulty is avoided thereby. In case the sacrificer were  not to observe this, the Brahmana would tell the women of the house, "As the  child is born in the mula-asterism, there is a great danger to the master (of the  house) and if you do not make santi (the act of appeasing) - just for the sake  of money (paisa), you may do anything you like. If you want to spend a small  sum (in performing the ceremony), you can invite four Brahmanas and spend  five rupees whereby everything will be propitious and you as well as your child  will be happy." Having heard these words of the Brahmana, the wife, if unex perienced, annoys her husband and puts him to expense. In the same way, the  Suklas (the priests of the Brahmanas) order many santis to be made in the  marriage ceremonies, and looking at the horoscopes of the bride and the bride groom says that the marriage should be brought about after appeasing Mangala  (Mars) because that planet is inauspicious. Thus the priest has his claim on all  things. If it does not rain or cholera and fever be ravaging, the santi should be  made and the disease disappears while the rain falls; such statements are made  in books but all this must be done through a Brahmana and at the end of all  ceremonies the Brahmanas should be fed, otherwise the rites observed are of  no avail. If a complaint be made to a god (devata) it must be mentioned to a  Brahmana who will convey it to that particular deity who gives such a reply as  would satisfy the Brahmana, therefore it is considered better to feed more Brah manas and give more daksina (alms in the shape of money). No one should  give less than what he can afford to pay. It is said: "One should not be cunning  in money matters."  

No religion has such methods (sadhana) as that of the Brahmanas. There are 

2 8 4 ROBI N RINEHAR T AND TONY K . STEWAR T  

answers found in the Sastras to whatever you may ask. If one drops a lamp  from his hand there is a santi for it and it is called the dipa-patana-santi (the  act of appeasing for dropping a lamp). If you invite a Brahmana at the time of  death, he would afford final beatitude (to the dead man) for two pices (penny)  which sum is regarded as a lakh of rupees spent (for the purpose). They show  a way to the poor as well as to the rich men in proportion to their abilities;  there is no difficulty or refusal to a question of any kind. There is no reply  only to one who enters into discussion or uses reasoning. There is no liberty  in the Sastras to ask what this is and what its cause is. If any one questions  that, he is called an atheist or scorner (mindaka) of the Sastras. There is every thing in the Sastras, if you listen without a discussion. If a goat is to be sacri 

ficed, it (the ceremony) is found in the candi-patha; while if a pumpkin is to  be cut, if a japa is to be made or a marjana [purification] is to be performed,  there is a sanction found in the Sastra. You get whatever you require. Whence  can such a kama-dhenu (a cow fulfilling all desires) be had? One should only  give his consent to hearing what is said. This is the state of the Hindu-Sastras,  and particularly in the Agamas, this principle is carried on to a very great  extent.  

The ceremonies of the followers of the Vama-marga are ten times greater  than those of the adherents of the Vedas. In the Vama-marga, the puja (wor ship) is called yaga [yajna](sacrifice), the Kall-yaga is named as anusthana in  which a sacrifice is made by repeating a thousand names of Kali. In all the  ceremonies (anusthana), there is a great deal of nyasa, mudra, and japa. In some  ceremonies, red peppers and bhilana [?] are sacrificed. They make a doll of the  man by the name of whom the ceremony is undertaken and after piercing a  knife in the body of the doll and destroying its eyes, sacrifice it piece by piece  and recite mantras; this ceremony is called marana [killing] or abhicara-karman  (act of killing). The Syena-yaga mentioned in the Tantras is intended for killing  enemies but there are thousands of such ceremonies in the books of Agamas  and the credulous men consider them valid, while the heretical Mantra-sastris  take an undue advantage. Thus there is a great deal of mischief in this subject.  If you go to a city like Baroda and examine the state of the thing, there you  will see much of it. 
