+++
title = "INTRODUCTION"

+++

Tantra in Practice: Mapping a Tradition  

David Gordon White  

As with all the books in this series, the present volume has the word "practice"  in its title. Practice is impossible without agents of practice, that is, practitioners,  and the first four sections of this volume comprise those contributions that focus  on Tantric practitioners or actors. These include Tantric preceptors (gurus) and  their followers; kings and priests; and devotees and the Tantric gods they worship  (for the gods too are Tantric actors). These relationships were not static, however,  and the fourth section contains accounts of traditions in transition and conflict.  The last three sections of the volume are devoted to the practices themselves.  Those contributions which describe the broad general practice of an entire tra dition or region of the Tantric world make up the fifth section. A wide gamut of  types or elements of Tantric practice, both external rites and their internal cor 

relates, is explored in sections six and seven.  

It may be that the ideal medium for a presentation of Tantric practice (or any  practice, for that matter) would be a video or CD-ROM, in which one could  actually view Tantric practitioners practicing their Tantra. This is impossible for  a number of reasons - Tantric secrecy, the fact that many of the practices detailed  here disappeared centuries ago, the practical limitations of scholarly publishing - so the reader is presented with a thick book. But books have their advantages as  well, and the Tantras themselves (which are texts) clearly state that scripture is  the necessary complement to the oral teachings one receives from the mouth of  one's guru. Furthermore, "pure" practice without interpretive theory is like a map  without a legend: if you don't know what the various elements of the practice  mean, then it is nothing but empty gestures. The reader should therefore not be  susprised to find that this volume on Tantric practice contains a significant  amount of material on Tantric theory. Very often, this is built into the structure  of the Tantric texts themselves: instructions for practice are contextualized in the  theories - of man, the universe, and everything - that undergird them. Yet these  theories can be as impenetrable as the practices themselves, especially in such 

4 DAVID GORDON WHITE  

esoteric traditions as these. Therefore, a second level of interpretation is in order,  and this is the invaluable contribution of the thirty-nine scholars whose chapters  are presented here, for not only have they translated the many languages of the  Tantras into English but they have also translated the multifaceted Tantric world 

view into comprehensible language in their introductory essays.  I have attempted to do the same in this general introduction, and the reader  will find that my analysis is based in no small part on the work of these same  scholars, whose publications I cite. In this introduction, names in [square brack ets] refer to contributions found in this volume; references in (parentheses) refer  to works found in the bibliography to this essay.  

Can Tantra Be Mapped?  

The contributions brought together in this volume all treat of Tantra, a body of  religious practice that has long defied scholarly attempts at definition. There are  many who maintain that Tantra or "Tantrism" is a Western category, imposed  upon Asian traditions in much the same way that the term "Hinduism" was ap 

plied, some centuries ago, to a wide swath of mainstream religious beliefs and  practices found on the Indian subcontinent. As Gertrude Stein did for the city of  Oakland, such persons assert on the subject of Tantra that there is no "there"  there. One could make the same claim regarding much of the terminology we  live with, of course: the categories of "religion," "democracy," and "art," for ex 

ample, prove to be quite nebulous when exposed to the glare of critical scrutiny.  Others would maintain that the Indian parable of the blind men and the elephant  is applicable to Tantra. Depending on which part of the elephant (which specific  Tantric tradition) a given blind man (scholar) is touching (studying), his account  of the animal (Tantra) will vary widely from that of his fellow blind man. The  scholar examining the fine hard tusk of pure Buddhist esotericism in modern day Japan would find herself hard pressed to recognize that the deeply furrowed  hide of the medieval Indian Kapalika's (Skull-Bearer's) practice [Lorenzen] is a  part of the same Tantric organism.  

Then there are the Western dilettantes, the self-proclaimed Tantric entrepre neurs, who have hitched their elephant-wagons to the New Age star to peddle a  dubious product called Tantric Sex, which they (and their clientele) assume to  be all there ever was to Tantra. It is certainly the case that the earliest accounts  of Tantra to reach the West were colonial descriptions from India, penned by  missionaries or administrators who presented its practices as particularly abomi nable excrescences of South Asian superstition. Their descriptions often included  shocking images of wholesale orgy in which every taboo was broken and all  human propriety perverted. Over the past two hundred years, there have been  three sorts of reactions to these distorted images. The first of these is that of India  itself: colonial and postcolonial Indians simply deny that such has ever existed;  or if it has, that it has had anything to do with Hinduism (another term that defies  categorization). The second is that of Tantric scholar-practitioners, both AsianINTRODUCTIO N 5  

and Western, who, in an attempt to rehabilitate this image of Tantra, have em phasized the refined ("right-handed") philosophical speculation that grew out of  preexisting ("left-handed") Tantric practices - some of which were of a sexual or  transgressive nature - while generally denying the foundational importance of  transgressivity or sexuality to the traditions themselves. The third, already men tioned, is that of the for-profit purveyors of Tantric Sex, who have no compunc tions about appropriating a misguided nineteenth-century polemic to peddle their  shoddy wares.  

' All three interpretive strategies may be viewed as legacies of the original "text"  of colonial misrepresentations of Tantra in India. All three tend to imagine Tantra  as a timeless, unalterable essence or excrescence that did not undergo any changes  either prior to or since its nineteenth-century "coming out," and that remained  constant as it was carried outward from India into every part of Asia. As the  variety of contributions to this volume show, neither the sensationalist colonial  representations nor the unsatisfactory monothetic responses to them, either "for"  or "against," stand up against the empirical data. The picture that emerges is rather  one of a complex array of ritual, theoretical, and narrative strategies that are  specific to their various religious, cultural, sociopolitical, geographical, and his torical contexts. Yet for all this, there nonetheless exists a grouping of common  denominators that should permit us to classify these as so many varieties of a  single tradition, the "there" of Tantra.  

In the pages that follow, I attempt to tease out the parameters and lineaments  of this thing called Tantra from a number of perspectives. The first of these is  thematic or phenomenological. This is mainly a comparative endeavor, in which  the common elements of many types of Tantric theory and practice arejuxtaposed  and synthesized. This sort of outsider's assessment of Tantra is an etic one: made  from a variety of perspectives, it will tend to characterize Tantra in ways not  necessarily recognizable to Tantric practitioners themselves. The Tantric insider's  or emic view must of necessity also be incorporated into our description. These  two perspectives, when juxtaposed with one another, ought to provide us with a  Tantric "ideology" - that is, a set of categorical "lenses" through which Tantric  practitioners have made sense of their practice within their broader worldview  (their ontology) and understandings of power in the world (their religious polity),  and human salvation in or beyond this world (their soteriology). Systems of prac tice that are incompatible with or unadaptable to lived experience on the one  hand, and to an imagined ontology, polity, and soteriology on the other, will not  persist through time. Perhaps unbeknownst to themselves, practitioners are con stantly testing their traditions against lived reality, and although religious change  is notoriously slow, it is nonetheless inexorable. Therefore, if there is still some 

thing called Tantra that has persisted since its origins in the middle of the first  millennium of the common era down to the present day - and I contend that  there is - its architectonics should be discernable through its emic categories.  Our approach, then, will consist of an inductive linking of the most salient features  of Tantric practice to specific and general Tantric precepts.  

The second perspective adopted here is historical. It is the case that every South 

6 DAVI D GORDO N WHIT E  

and East Asian religious tradition has had a Tantric phase or component, and  many of these continue down to the present day. However, none of these have  continued unchanged since the original Tantric impetus, and it is for this reason  that our account of Tantra must be historical. No synchronic taxonomy of the  salient features of Tantric theory and practice will suffice; only through a dia 

chronic or evolutionary overview of the various schools, sects, scriptures, bodies  of practice, and lines of transmission that have comprised Tantra will we be able  to make sense of this tradition. Such a historical accounting must not, moreover,  be limited to a simple history of ideas. It must engage as well with ground-level  practice, imagery, institutions, political realities, and the interface between public  and private religion.  

Third, our approach must attend to the human agents or actors in the dissem ination and transformation of Tantric doctrines and practices. Here the following  questions must be addressed. Which Tantric practitioners have practiced for  themselves, and which have practiced for others as Tantric specialists? What have  been the social and religious backgrounds of the latter? Who have constituted  their clienteles? What have been their clients' motives for engaging them to per form their functions? When a king or other potentate is a Tantric practitioner,  what impact does his patronage have on religious institutions and the religious  and political life of his subjects? What has been the nature of the interface between  "popular" and "elite" forms of practice? How do theory and practice change when  practice becomes individual as opposed to collective?  

Finally, a word about the scope of this endeavor. Because this is a comparative  enterprise (in which different forms of Tantra, from different historical periods,  religious traditions, and sociopolitical contexts are being compared), the question  of parameters arises: where does one draw the line between "Tantra" and "not 

Tantra"? In other words, if we are attempting to delimit Tantra from other forms  of religious practice in Asia, what are our criteria to be for determining Tantra's  specificity? What is it that has made Tantra stand out from the mainstream (or  in some cases, as the mainstream) as a body of practice to live for - and sometimes  to fight for, to kill for, or to die for? Throughout the fifteen hundred years of its  history, Tantra has rarely left people indifferent, and this has been precisely due  to the fact that it has been viewed as something different.  

Our definition of Tantra must therefore attend to Tantra's difference, but here  as well we must tread with caution. We may speak in terms of a "hard core" and  a "soft core" of Tantra. The former, composed solely of those elements of Tantric  doctrine and practice that are not found anywhere else in the Asian religious  traditions under study, would provide us with a sharply defined but very limited  account of Tantra - and one that would, moreover, probably exclude many of  the doctrines and practices that practitioners have themselves deemed to be Tan 

tric. A more inclusive, "soft core," definition tends to break down, however, be cause its parameters will encompass doctrines and practices found in nearly all  forms of the various Asian traditions, from the Vedas and early teachings of the  Buddha and Mahavira down through conventional forms of Hinduism, Jainism, 

INTRODUCTION 7  

Buddhism, Daoism, and Shinto, as well as in many nonelite forms of Asian reli gious practice. For example, much of mainstream Hindu devotional ritual - pre liminary purifications, the use of mantras for honoring the deity, forms of worship,  and so on - has its origins in the scriptures of the "soft core" of Hindu Tantra,  the Saiva Agamas. Elsewhere, the Tantric dictum that the human being (as op posed to an animal or a deity) is the creature best suited to salvation or liberation  through Tantric practice differs little from anthropocentric doctrines of the  broader Hindu, Buddhist, or Jain mainstream. The danger here is that everything  becomes Tantra, and our category loses its specificity.  

Yet, at the same time, if we were to deny that this "soft core" is authentically  Tantric, we would fly in the face of the emic understandings of householders and  ritual specialists from the modern-day Tantric mainstream, including Hindu Sri vidya practitioners in India and Nepal, Buddhist Gelugpa practitioners in Tibet  and the Tibetan diaspora, and practitioners of pure Buddhist esotericism (mikkyo,  from the Chinese mijiao, "esoteric teaching") in Japan. If these practitioners con sider their daily religious observances as well as their life-cycle rites and post mortem rituals to be Tantric, who are we to say they are wrong?  

A Working Definition  

Tantra has persisted and often thrived throughout Asian history since the middle  of the first millennium of the common era. Its practitioners have lived in India,  China, Japan, Tibet, Nepal, Bhutan, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Korea, and Mongolia, as  well as in the "Greater India" of medieval Southeast Asia: Cambodia, Burma, and  Indonesia. No form of medieval Hinduism, Buddhism, orjainism [Dundas] has  been without a Tantric component; and some South Asian Islamic traditions have,  as well, borne a Tantric stamp [Khan]. In Hindu India, the Paficaratra [Flood],  Gaudlya Vaisnava, Sahajiya, Pasupata, Kapalika, Saiva Siddhanta, Siddha Kaula,  Yogini Kaula, Krama, Trika, Srividya, Pascimamnaya, Nath Siddha, Aghori, Ben gali Sakta-Vaisnava and Baul traditions, and Tamil Nayanar and Alvar traditions  (Hudson], have all been Tantric or heavily colored by Tantra.  

Although Buddhism disappeared from India in the thirteenth century, India  was the source of the Buddhist Mahasiddha tradition [Kapstein] and the cradle  of Buddhist Tantra in its Mahayana, Mantrayana, and Vajrayana (including Ka lacakra [Newman]) forms. In Java, the layout of the massive Borobadur monu ment, begun in the eighth century, is that of a massive cosmogram, perhaps the  dharmadhatu-mandala, a Buddhist Tantric rendering of the enlightened universe.  The late tenth-century author of the Buddhist Kalacakra Tantra, although he may  have been born in Java (Newman 1985: 85), probably composed his work, which  contains a number of references to Islam, in what is now central Pakistan (Orofino  1997). Tibetan Buddhism is by definition a Tantric tradition: this applies to the  four major orders (the Nyingmapas, Kagyupas, Sakyapas, and Gelugpas), as well  as to the Dzogchen [Klein] and other syncretistic traditions. Much of the ritual 

8 DAVID GORDON WHITE  

of the medieval Chinese state was Tantric, and it was from China that nearly all  of the Buddhist Tantric traditions of Japan were transmitted. In China, Tantra has  survived since the twelfth century C.E. within Daoist ritual practice, and it has  been said that Daoism is the most enduring Chinese monument to Tantric Bud 

dhism (Strickmann 1996: 49). Elsewhere, the Chinese Chan (a Sinicization of  Sanskrit dhydna, "meditation") school lives on in Japan as Zen Buddhism [Bodi ford]. In Burma, the Zawgyis, Theravada monk-alchemists, have for centuries  combined elements of Theravada Buddhism, Daoism, and Tantric alchemy in their  practice. Cambodian inscriptions indicate the presence of Hindu tantrikas (prac titioners of Tantra) there in the medieval period. Present-day Balinese Hinduism  betrays its medieval Indian Tantric origins, and Sri Lankan cults of the "demonic"  beings known as yakkhas (yaksas in Sanskrit) and of Kataragama (the equivalent  of Skanda/Manjusri) contain elements that may be qualified as Tantric. In Japan,  all of the eight schools of Buddhism have a Tantric pedigree, although Shingon  and Tendai have been Japan's most sucessful exponents of "Pure Buddhist  Esotericism."  

Finally, the constitutional monarchies of Nepal and Bhutan are the world's sole  surviving "Tantric kingdoms"; their state ceremonial comprises Hindu Tantric  liturgies and rituals, and nearly all of their deities are Tantric. One of these,  Bhairava, is a Tantric god found in every part of Asia, and worshiped in a Tantric  mode by Hindus, Jains, and Buddhists alike. Similarly, the goddesses and gods  Tara, Ambika, Aksobhya, Mahakala, Ganesa, Avalokitesvara-Lokesvara-Guanyin Kannon, and Skanda-Manjusri, as well as numerous groups of multiple Tantric  deities, are found throughout much of Asia. It is the pan-Asian existence of deities  such as these that supports an argument that medieval and precolonial Asian  religions, rather than having been discrete Tantric Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain  traditions, were, to a great extent, Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain varieties of an over arching tradition called "Tantra."  

On what theoretical basis or bases may we term all of these medieval, precolonial,  or modem traditions "Tantric"? I will begin by borrowing a definition proposed by  Madeleine Biardeau and broadened by Andre Padoux. Padoux (1986: 273), citing  Biardeau, begins by saying that the doctrinal aspect of Tantra is "an attempt to place  kama, desire, in every sense of the word, in the service of liberation . . . not to  sacrifice this world for liberation's sake, but to reinstate it, in varying ways, within  the perspective of salvation. This use of kama and of all aspects of this world  to gain both worldly and supernatural enjoyments (bhukri) and powers (siddhis),  and to obtain liberation in this life (jivanmukti), implies a particular attitude on the  part of the Tantric adept toward the cosmos, whereby he feels integrated within  an all-embracing system of micro-macrocosmic correlations."  

This definition concentrates on the goals of Tantric practice (sadhana). Here, I  wish to add a consideration of the nature of Tantric practice itself. Tantric practice  is an effort to gain access to and appropriate the energy or enlightened conscious ness of the absolute godhead that courses through the universe, giving its crea tures life and the potential for salvation. Humans in particular are empowered to 

INTRODUCTION 9  

realize this goal through strategies of embodiment - that is, of causing that divine  energy to become concentrated in one or another sort of template, grid, or me socosm - prior to its internalization in or identification with the individual mi crocosm. With this, I offer the following working definition of Tantra:  

Tantra is that Asian body of beliefs and practices which, working from the principle  that the universe we experience is nothing other than the concrete manifestation of ,  the divine energy of the godhead that creates and maintains that universe, seeks to  ritually appropriate and channel that energy, within the human microcosm, in cre ative and emancipatory ways.  

This definition, however, must be modified according to its contexts, given that  it would probably be rejected out of hand by many Tantric practitioners, who  would find it at variance with their own particular doctrines and perspectives.  Buddhists, for example, would be inclined to replace the term "energy" with  "teaching" or "enlightened consciousness," whereas a village-level practitioner  would, if asked, probably feel more comfortable with the term "beings." However,  when this definition is shown to be applicable to major forms of Tantric practice  across the gamut of its regional and vernacular Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain forms  in Asia, it becomes a valuable organizing principle.  

The Tantric Mandala  

The key to understanding Tantric practice is the mandala, the energy grid that  represents the constant flow of divine and demonic, human and animal impulses  in the universe, as they interact in both constructive and destructive patterns.  Like the Vedic sacrificial altar of which it is a streamlined form, the mandala is a  mesocosm, mediating between the great and small (the universal macrocosm and  the individual microcosm), as well as between the mundane and the sublime (the  protocosm of the visible world of human experience and the transcendent-yet immanent metacosm that is its invisible fount). This grid is three dimensional, in  the sense that it locates the supreme deity (god, goddess, celestial buddha, bo 

dhisattva, or enlightened tirthankara), the source of that energy and ground of  the grid itself, at the center and apex of a hierarchized cosmos. All other beings,  including the practitioner, will be situated at lower levels of energy/consciousness/  being, radiating downward and outward from the mandala's elevated center  point.  

Because the deity is both transcendent and immanent, all of the beings located  at the various energy levels on the grid participate in the outward flow of the  godhead, and are in some way emanations or hypostases of the deity himself (or  herself). For Hindu Tantra, this means that the world is real and not an illusion;  this is an important distinguishing feature of Hindu Tantric doctrine. Rather than  attempting to see through or transcend the world, the practioner comes to rec 

ognize "that" (the world) as "I" (the supreme egoity of the godhead): in other  words, s/he gains a "god's eye view" of the universe, and recognizes it to be 

10 DAVI D GORDO N WHIT E  

nothing other than herself/himself. For East Asian Buddhist Tantra in particular,  this means that the totality of the cosmos is a "realm of Dharma," sharing an  underlying common principle (the teachings of the buddhas), if not a common  material substance [Rambelli]. More generally, this means that buddhahood is  virtual within all creatures. In the words of the Hevajra Tantra (2.4.70, 75), "All  beings are buddhas" and "there is no being that is not enlightened, if it but knows  its own true nature." To render this blissful Buddha nature manifest is the purpose  of Tantric practice - whether externalized in rites or internalized in yoga (Kvaerne  1975: 128) - and the body is "the indispensable organ for contact with the ab solute" (Faure 1998: 61). Rather than being impediments, the world and the  human body become channels to salvation.  

At popular levels of practice throughout Asia, this means that the world of  everyday life can only be negotiated by transacting with myriad beings extending  from the spirit world of the recently deceased to the fierce protector deities that  are the lower emanations or simply the servants of the high gods at the center of  the elite mandalas. Here, embodying the divine is less a goal than a ritual tech 

nique (inducing a state of possession) for combatting demons. We will turn to  the nonelite Tantric practice of the mandala in Part Two of this essay; here, we  concentrate on elite theory and practice.  

The energy levels of the Tantric universe are generally represented as a set of  concentric circles (cakras) of hypostasized forms of the divine energy which, in  addition to appearing as an array of divine, enlightened, perfected, demonic,  human, or animal beings, also manifest themselves on an acoustic level, as gar 

lands or piled-up aggregates of phonemes (mantras); on a graphic level, as the  written characters of the hieratic alphabets; and as the hierarchized cakras of the  yogic body. These same configurations constitute the flow charts of Tantric line ages, with the flow of divine energy (but also the fluid, acoustic, or photic essence  of the godhead; or the teachings of enlightened buddhas) streaming downward  and outward through a succession of male and female deities and demigods - the latter often portrayed in an animal or demonic mode - into "superhuman"  gurus [Padoux] and their human disciples.  

In every case, one detects "fractal" patterns, in which the original bipolar dyad  of the godhead in essence and manifestation (usually male and female) proliferates  into increasing orders of multiplicity. Unity in multiplicity is a hallmark of Tantra,  and in this respect, it is an extension of earlier, less complex, Asian metaphysical  systems. There is, in Tantra, an exponential explosion of all preexisting pantheons  of deities, and together with these, an expansion of every sort of category - family,  number, color, direction, aspect, and so on - into an intricate cosmic calculus.  With its perfect geometric forms and elaborately interwoven lines, the mandala  is the ideal conceptual tool for plotting the multi-leveled and polyvalent interre lationships between these categories. As such it can, and often does, become self 

referential, a transcendent and ideal "utopia," entirely abstracted from the "real  world" of which it is the invisible, theoretical ground. Perhaps the best-known  mandala-cum-plotting device in the Tantric universe is the Sri Cakra or Sri Yantra  of Hindu Tantric practice, a perfectly balanced three-dimensional geometric di-

INTRODUCTIO N 1 1  

agram comprising of a series of eleven interlocking and embedded triangles (also  called cakras) radiating downward and outward from a center point, and enclosed  by a circle and a square. The mandalas of Buddhist and Jain Tantric practice  follow similar structural and dynamic principles.  

Even at this level of abstraction, the Tantric mandala remains a template  through which humans may interact with the divine, and thereby come to ex perience reality from a superhuman perspective. The practice of the mandala  generally involves a meditative or performative projection of both the metacosmic  godhead and the protocosmic self into its vortex, followed by an implosion of the  entire grid into its center point. Here, the underlying assumption is that this  implosion is a reversal of the original cosmogony - that is, of a primal impulse  or flow (samsara) into manifest existence - back into the source of energies  mapped on the grid. One's self-projection into the mandala and gradual return  to the center is therefore a return to the source of one's being; at each level, one  is gnoseologically transformed into a higher, more divine, more enlightened being,  until one becomes the god or buddha at the center (except in some dualist forms  of Tantra). As we will show, there is an implicit notion of biological succession  here, from the supreme godhead down through a guru-disciple lineage, which  makes initiation and consecration central features of Tantric theory and practice.  

Although the name, attributes, and entourage of the deity located at the center  of the mandala vary from one tradition to another, nearly all Tantric practice of  the mandala has this same goal, of transacting with and eventually identifying  with that deity. In this practice, movement toward the center, effected through a  combination of external ritual and internal meditative practices, entails harmo 

nizing one's own energy or consciousness level with that of the (deities of the)  circle in which one finds oneself. First encountered as obstacles, these divine,  demonic, or animal impulses are eventually overcome, that is, transformed into  positive sources of energy that carry one closer and closer to the deity at the  center. Alternatively, one may, having overcome them, also coerce those same  potentially destructive lower-level beings to do one's bidding through various  ritual technologies, about which more below. Here, the true sense of the term  yantra (as in the Sri Yantra) is brought to the fore: a yantra is a mesocosmic device  or machine for controlling (from the Sanskrit root yam) one's conceptual reality  [Rabe].  

It is the nature of this grid or template, together with the chosen medium - that is, the mediating substance - of this process of divine embodiment that, more  than anything else, differentiates one form of Tantra from another. When the  template is the body of a naked maiden and the medium her sexual or menstrual  discharge, we are in the presence of the Tantra of the old Hindu "clans" (the Kula  or Kaula) and their inner and East Asian Buddhist Tantric homologues. Once we  leave these traditions behind, however, the template will more often be a body  of sound, of organized space, or of a deity - either in the form of a concrete or  abstract worship support, a buddha's "pleasure body" (sambhogakaya), one's own  subtle body, the person of the Tantric guru or lama, or the empty sky.  

Often, templates and media will be combined. By far the most prevalent and 

12 DAVI D GORDO N WHIT E  

most important example of this is the practice of identifying the deity with his or  her "seed mantra" (bija-mantra): this notion, that the sound shape of a mantra  exactly renders a given deity's energy level, is the basis for mantric practice across  all Tantric traditions. Elsewhere, mandalas will have mantras inscribed on them;  mantras infused into water will transform it into nectar and other fluids worthy  of the gods; configurations or positions of the practitioner's hands or body (mu 

dras) will represent a deity's energies; mandalas will be projected onto the subtle  body, while the practitioner identifies with the deity at the center (as in Buddhist  "deity yoga" [Lopez]); using mantras, deities will be transferred from the subtle  body into a concrete image for worship; or mandalas with their arrays of deities  will be reproduced by human participants in ritual choreographies (Brooks 1992:  418-28; Samuel 1993: 266). Much of Tantric yogic practice combines nearly all  of these elements, embodying the energy of the godhead on the grid of the subtle  body through solid, fluid, acoustic, and photic media.  

Generally speaking, the more subtle the medium (sound and light), the more  internal, meditative, and sublimated the practice; conversely, concrete (fluid and  solid) media imply external and more body-related practice, including sexual  ritual, alchemy, and hatha yoga. Internal practice, although it may incorporate  the lower demonic and animal forms of divine energy, will tend to focus on the  deity in sublime, even abstract, ways; external practice, which often implies sac 

rificial offerings, possessed states, and ritual technologies, will more often focus  on fierce forms or hypostases of the deity, which it seeks to coerce and control.  Much of the "soft core" of mainstream Tantric practice combines external ritual  manipulations with internal meditiative practice, through the templates of man 

date, mantra, and mudra, and often in a devotional mode [Gupta].  One might characterize the range of Tantric uses of these templates and media  as a continuum extending from "doing" to "knowing." At one extreme, we find  the concrete external utilization of blood offerings, human bones, bodily fluids,  sexual intercourse, and so on, that characterize the mortuary practices - or at  least the imagery thereof - of the early Hindu Kaula, early Jain Tantra, and the  Buddhist Tantras of Supreme Yoga. At the other, we find a meditative ritual  construction and mental enactment of generally less horrific or erotic practices,  which Douglas Brooks has referred to as the "prescriptive imagination," and Glen  Hayes the "imaginative structuring of experience." We also find a correlation  between these bodies of practice, with their variable media and templates, and  their goals. Practitioners who "do" their Tantra will emphasize the somatic goals  of bodily immortality (jivanmukti), pleasure (bhukti), and power (or "powers,"  siddhis) in the world. Those who "know" their practice will tend to focus on self deification at a more cognitive or psychological level: the transformation of human  consciousness into divine consciousness [Muller-Ortega] or the perfection of wis dom and realization of one's own inherent Buddha nature. Here, ritual practice  mainly serves as a catalyst for a spiritual breakthrough, a transformation of con sciousness; the Zen koan is a well-known case in point. In Buddhist Tantra - and  in this it differs from Hinduism or Jainism - the ultimate goal of both those who 

INTRODUCTIO N 13  

"do" and who "know" their practice will be to enlighten and thereby liberate all  other creatures from suffering existence. This ethical parameter is by and large  absent from Hindu Tantra (Samuel 1993: 243). Finally, the goals of "soft-core"  Tantric householders will differ little from those of their "non-Tantric" counter 

parts: liberation into the godhead, the extinction of suffering, purification, health,  wealth, long life, and a strong family unit.  

What is important to remember here is that the basic structure and dynamics  of the mandala itself remain constant, regardless of variations in the media that  flow through it or the names and iconographies of the deities found within its  boundaries. Although it is mainly on the basis of these important details that  various Tantric lineages, sects, and traditions distinguish themselves from one  another, it is their common use of the mandala, more than any other feature of  their practice, that makes them Tantric. Viewed in this way, the varieties of Tantric  practice exhibit a certain uniformity. Practitioners located outside or at the mar gins of the mesocosmic energy grid project themselves into the mandala and work  their way back to the deity at the center, with whom they identify (in nondualist  Tantric systems) or with whom they enter into immediate proximity or contact  (in such dualist systems as Saiva Siddhanta, which maintained that one could  never become Siva; at best, one could become a "second Siva," and experience  the world in the same way as god). Now, it is true that all of these media (with  the possible exception of sexual fluids) may also be found in non-Tantric forms  of practice throughout Asia, ranging from mainstream devotional traditions to the  "ritual technologies" of shamans and other nonelite religious specialists. The ritual  use of these media, however, in combination with the mandala as matrix for the  energy flow between the protocosmic and metacosmic levels of cosmic reality is,  I would argue, specific to Tantra.  

Tantric Initiation  

The theory and practice of the Tantric mandala operates on a mesocosmic level,  that is, on the level of a mediating template between protocosm and metacosm  as well as between macrocosm and microcosm. Quite often, Tantric practitioners  will project the mandala upon the internal grid of the "heart," the subtle or yogic  body, or a body that has been modified to embody enlightenment. This process  of internalization generally begins with initiation, which plays two complementary  roles. On the one hand, it transforms a biologically given individual into a vessel  capable of receiving, channeling, or actualizing the divine energy of the godhead;  on the other, it initiates her or him into a particular Tantric lineage and body of  teachings that extend back, through the guru or lama and his predecessors, to  the godhead itself. Initiation is effected by the teacher, who has been previously  transformed and empowered through his own initiation (diksa) and consecration  (abhiseka), who plants in the initiate's body a "seed" or "seme" of the essence of  the godhead. This seed takes a number of forms, ranging from a drop of bodily  or sexual fluid to a mantra, a photic image, or a drop or seed of consciousness 

14 DAVI D GORDO N WHIT E  

or the bodhisattva's "thought of enlightenment" (bodhicitta). Vital breath (prana)  is generally the dynamic element in this transfer, just as it is in the animation of  external images for worship and the internal practices of yoga. Through this "in semination" process, the guru or lama makes the initiate a part of the flow chart  of the Tantric lineage, which radiates outward in mandala fashion from the god head or buddhahood that is its center and source. In many Tantric traditions,  this process involves a transfer of the guru or lama's feminine energy (sakti) or  wisdom (prajna) into his disciple. The form that that transfer takes, ranging from  the actual participation of a female consort in ritual sex to more sublimated trans fers effected through food (yogurt, for example), mantras, or other media, varies  according to tradition. The pivotal and transformative role of the guru in initiation  has led to an equation in most Tantric traditions between guru and godhead, and  meditation will often involve visualizing the guru as god at the center of the  mandala.  

This very concrete notion of lineage is so fundamental to Tantra in the Tibetan  tradition that two similar terms (both pronounced gyr) are used for "teaching  linege," "genealogical lineage," and "Tantra" in the Tibetan language. Similarly, in  Indian Hindu and Buddhist Tantra, the term kula ("family," "clan") is applied to  the entire mandala [Brooks]: initiation into the mandala is initiation into the divine  family of Siva, Vajradhara, and so on, and the mandala of the monastery consti 

tutes a sort of microcosmic household (Samuel 1993: 150-51). This intimate  relationship between spiritual lineage and biological lineage is based in no small  part in socioreligious reality; very often, one is initiated into a Tantric tradition  by one's biological father. The same rule often applies at the state level; lineages  of princes and kings are initiated by parallel lineages of royal Tantric gurus, with  the lineage god or goddess of both king and priest - that is, the deity at the heart  of the mandala - being the same for both. In cases of theocratic government, as  in Tibet, the interpenetration of biological, spiritual, and royal lines become more  pronounced.  

Yoga and Tantra  

Crucial to the initiation process is the notion that within the gross body of the  human microcosm or protocosm there is a subtle, yogic body that is the meso cosmic replica of the divine, universal macrocosm or metacosm. As such, yoga  constitutes a vital component of Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain [Qvarnstrom] Tantric  theory and practice. This body, which comprises energy channels (nadis) and  centers (cakras), drops, and winds, is itself a mandala. If it were to be viewed  from above, the vertical central channel of the subtle body, which mediates the  bipolar (and sexually gendered) internal dynamic of the godhead, would appear  as the center point of the mandala, with the various cakras aligned along that  channel appearing as so many concentric circles, wheels, or lotuses radiating  outward from that center. Often, each of the spokes or petals of these cakras will  have male and female deities, as well as Sanskrit phonemes and graphemes, as-INTRODUCTION 15  

signed to it. As such, initiation and all forms of yogic practice involve, once again,  an effort on the part of the practitioner to return to the elevated center point of  the emanated mandala. Once the practitioner has succeeded in centering all of  the energies coursing through his subtle body - energies that flow through the  myriad subtle channels in the form of fluids, phonemes, and graphemes - the  final phase of his practice will effect the reimplosion of feminine energy into (a  usually) masculine essence or pure consciousness. This final phase is often por trayed as the merging of the inner female energy - called Kundalini (the coiled  serpent energy, in Hinduism) or Avadhuti or Candali (in Buddhism) - situated  in the lower half of the body, with a masculine principle (Siva in Hinduism, Upaya  in Buddhism) located in the cranial vault. This union is represented in terms not  only of energies but of sexual fluids, as well. In Hindu practice, the sanguinary  Kundalini rises to join the seminal Siva in the cranial vault, with the "nectar"  produced from their union optimally being held there by the practitioner, as a  means to becoming a Siddha, a "self-made god" (White 1996: 320)  

Buddhist yogic imagery is similar to that of the Hindus. A number of early  Vajrayana works speak of red and white sexual fluids being united into the  thought of enlightenment in the central channel; one of these texts, the Hevajra  Tantra (1.32), portrays the internal feminine energy as the Candali ("Outcaste  Woman") who blazes upward into the cranial vault. The male "moon" residing  there is made to melt by her heat, and their conjoined fluid - now the bodhi 

citta - flows down through the cakras, suffusing the practitioner as it does with  the bliss of their union. Later Buddhist traditions more closely follow the dynamic  of Hindu hatha yogic practice, with feminine energy being made to rise through  the cakras to the "Lotus of Great Bliss" in the head (Kvaerne 1975: 120-21). The  Completion Phase of Supreme Yoga visualization [Bentor] - in which the mandala  is incorporated into the subtle body - is rife with the imagery of both sexuality  and death; however, as in all of Buddhist practice, these transformative experi ences are but means to the higher end of enlightenment and buddhahood.  

"Tantric Sex"  

Both historically and conceptually, yoga is in many ways an internalization of  sexual intecourse between a man and a woman [Hayes], which brings us back to  the vexed matter of Tantric sex. Tantric art abounds in representations of couples  (and sometimes larger groups) engaged in all manner of sexual intercourse (mai 

thuna, yab-yum, and so on), and most Tantric scriptures include extended dis cussions of sexual practice. Siva and Vajrasattva, the high gods of Saiva Hindu  Tantra and Buddhist Vajrayana, are themselves depicted as engaging in endless  sexual marathons with their consorts, when they (and a number of other super natural beings) are not portrayed as actually dwelling inside the female organ  itself. If the Tantric practitioner's goal is to replace mundane human thought with  enlightened god-consciousness, and if sexuality is the divine path to enlighten ment, then the practitioner's imitatio dei should, quite reasonably, be enacted in 

16 DAVI D GORDO N WHIT E  

a sexual mode. Yet, over the centuries, the debate has raged as to whether Tantric  sexual imagery is to be taken literally or simply as so much figurative symboli zation of exalted, dispassionate, even disembodied, states of consciousness.  

This debate, both pro and con, may be somewhat misplaced, when one con siders the possible origins of "Tantric sex." In early Hindu Tantra, sexual inter course was often simply the practical means for generating the sexual fluids that  constituted the preferred offering of the Tantric deities. Elsewhere, there can be  no doubt that an early and persistent form of Tantric initiation and practice in volved transactions in sexual fluids between a male initiate and a female consort - termed yogini, duti (the female "messenger"), or Sakti ("energy") for Hindus; and  dakini, prajna ("wisdom"), or mudra (the "seal") for their Buddhist counterparts.  Here, the male initiate was physically inseminated or insanguinated with the sex ual emissions of the female consort (sometimes together with the semen of the  male guru or lama), as a means of transforming him, reproductively as it were,  into a son of the clan (kula-putra, in Hindu Tantra). Here, the role of the female  consort is vital, because the clan fluid (kula-dravya) or clan nectar (kulamrta),  vulval essence (yoni-tattva), or thought of enlightenment (bodhicitta) is understood  to flow naturally through her womb. Because she is herself the embodiment of  the energy of the godhead (or Wisdom, the complement to male Skill in Means),  her sexual or menstrual discharge is considered to be the germ plasm of the  godhead or enlightened consciousness itself. Human males, through whom this  divine fluid does not naturally flow, can only gain access to it through the conduit  of the female sexual organ (White 1998). As such, "Tantric sex" would originally  have been a matter of generating, offering, and ingesting transformative sexual  fluids. It was only later that bliss itself would come to take center stage, replacing  the notion of sexual orgasm as a means to an end with a more psychologized  understanding of the same as an end in itself - a blissful expansion of conscious ness (Sanderson 1988: 679-80).  

Transactions in and the consumption of sexual fluids also served as means for  affirming the doctrine of identity in difference, or the identity of samsara and  nirvana, in Hindu and Buddhist Tantra. In tenth- to eleventh-century Hindu  Tantra in Kashmir, for example, a recognition of the consciousness-expanding  effects of orgasm was accompanied by an understanding of the psychological  effects of the oral consumption of such an impure - and thereby powerful and  dangerous - substance as female discharge (sexual emissions and menstrual  blood), as well as the other prohibited substances: the five makaras, the five  nectars, and so on. Here, in a socioreligious system in which "you are what you  eat," the potentially self-destructive act of ingesting such substances was deemed  sufficient to effect a breakthrough from limited conventional thought to ex panded, enlightened god-consciousness (Sanderson 1995: 85-87). The Siddhas  and "crazy yogis" of Vajrayana tradition are legendary for having resorted to ali 

mentary and sexual transgression as means of teaching the identity of samsara and  nirvana. One of these, the Bhutanese Drukpa Kunley, made a career of converting  demonesses to Buddhism with his "flaming thunderbolt of wisdom," that is, his 

INTRODUCTIO N 17  

penis, about which he then sang songs in public meetings. For those who had  eyes to see and ears to hear, this would no doubt have been a consciousness raising experience (Dowman 1980).  

Erotico-mystical practices such as these were not present in every form of early  Tantra, and most Tantric traditions have, over time, refined them into more sub limated forms of practice, on a mantric, mandalic, ritual, or yogic level; some  traditions have played down their importance or eschewed them as too dangerous  for all but the supremely qualified. Many later Hindu and Buddhist Tantric  schools have valued visualization of the Tantric consort over actual intercourse  with her; and in spite of explicit references to emission of the bodhicitta in most  Supreme Yoga Tantra consecrations, Buddhist Tantra has generally emphasized  seminal retention and the reversal of sexual energy within the body of the male  practitioner (Kvaerne 1975: 108). In fact, the great bulk of Buddhist Tantric dis 

course on sexuality - as well as on alchemy, which is the union of male and  female reagents - has long since been internalized into descriptions of the yogic  union of female Wisdom with male Skill in Means, within the subtle body.  

Yet the sexual referent has nearly always remained present in even the most  "cosmeticized" or "semanticized" forms of Tantric discourse (Sanderson 1995:  79). If Michel Strickmann (1996: 203) is correct when he asserts that Tantric art  is Tantric ritual, and that Buddhist Tantric ritual is [sexual] union with an icon,  then there is little to Tantric practice that has not borne some occult or explicit  sexual valence. This is as it should be. The soteriological value of passion or desire  itself has always been a watchword of Tantra: on this basis alone, "salvific sexu ality" ought to lie at the heart of Tantric practice. However, the extent to which  precept has been reproduced in practice varies from one Tantric tradition to  another, and has changed over time within every one of those traditions.  

Here, a general statement on the place of the feminine in Tantra is in order.  Many if not most Tantric traditions emphasize the role of women and (or as)  goddesses on a number of levels. One of the distinguishing features of Tantra is,  in fact, its proliferation of goddesses - sometimes benign like the compassionate  Guanyin, or ambiguous like the hunchbacked Kubjika [Goudriaan], but most  often fierce, like the terrible black Kali [McDermott]. In such traditions, the hy 

postases or energies of the male (or sometimes female, in "pure Sakta" forms of  Hindu Tantra) godhead are generally female, as are the inner energies of the subtle  body, the body of the Tantric consort, Buddhist Wisdom (prajna), and the sacred  geography of the world itself. In the Hindu Tantric worldview, the world is the  body of the goddess, and its myriad religious landscapes her many physical fea 

tures. This understanding lies at the heart of the networks of the goddess's pithas  ("benches") in South Asia (Sircar 1973; Dyczkowski 1999), as well as of the many  "womb-caves" of the Tantric goddesses that dot the Tibetan and inner Asian  Buddhist landscape (Stein 1988). Elsewhere, exceptional women have risen to  prominence in certain Tantric traditions - the Tibetan Yogini Ma gcig Lab sgron  being a case in point [Orofino] - and women have been praised and often wor 

shiped as goddesses in many Tantric scriptures. 

18 DAVID GORDON WHITE  

It would, however, be incorrect to say that all Tantric traditions have placed  this stress on the power of the feminine. Japanese Tantra generally identifies the  "six elements" of our world as the body of the male buddha Vairocana, and  Japanese sacred mountains are generally male. Elsewhere, a number of early "cler 

ical" Tantric traditions, discussed below (especially Hindu Saiva Siddhanta and  the Buddhist Tantras of Action and Observance), portray the expansion of the  godhead into the world as a predominantly masculine affair. Furthermore, it  would be hasty to conclude, on the basis of the general Tantric exaltation of  feminine energy, that female practitioners have ever dominated the religious or  political Tantric sphere. Even in her transformative initiatory role, the Tantric  consort has remained instrumental to the requirements of the male practitioners  she transforms.  

Historical Parameters  

As Geoffrey Samuel (1993: 7-10) has argued for Tibetan Buddhist society, the  body of doctrines and practices that are grouped under the heading of Tantra all  draw, to varying degrees, upon two types of sources. These are the "shamanic"  magical practices or ritual technologies of nonelite religious specialists and their  clienteles; and the speculative and scholasticist productions of often state-spon 

sored religious elites (which Samuel terms "clerical"). The history of Tantra is the  history of the interaction between these two strands of practice and practitioners,  whose clienteles, comprising commoners and political elites, have nearly always  overlapped. There can be no doubt that the relationships among Indian kings and  the Tantric specialists they chose over other alternatives (generally Vedic) are key  to understanding the origins and history of this interaction. These specialists  would probably have included professional priests of emerging temples of Tantric  deities; royal chaplains seeking enhanced religious protection for their royal cli ents; court astrologers, physicians, and magicians; "shamanic" itinerant Siddhas  and their female consorts or saktis (Gupta-Hoens-Goudriaan 1979: 29-35); and  the leaders of important monastic orders.  

Apart from the fact of its Indian provenance, the "origin" of Tantra will not be  treated here. Depending on whether one's criteria are text- or iconography-based  or grounded in practice, deities, lineages, or sociopolitical contexts, one's dating  and account of Tantra's origins will vary significantly. Here, we limit ourselves to  stating that Tantra was an orthogenic development out of prior mainstream (but  not necessarily elite) traditions, that nonetheless also drew on both foreign (ad 

stratal) and popular (substratal) sources. So, for example, the homa (fire) rites  common to most Tantric traditions are direct heirs of the Vedic homa sacrifices  (an orthogenic development), whereas certain elements of Tibetan Buddhist Tan tra clearly draw on both Iranian (adstratal) and indigenous (substratal) traditions.  In Japan, the sanrinjin (literally, "three bodies with discs") theory, which divided  the Buddha's appearances in the phenomenal world into three types, was an 

INTRODUCTIO N 19  

explicit means for incorporating the (adstratal) Indian deities of Hinduism into  the Buddhist fold as "propagators of Buddhism" (a strategy introduced in India),  as well as for Buddhicizing (substratal) indigenous Japanese kami deities (Mat sunaga 1987: 52). The question nonetheless remains as to when and by what  means these deities and the rituals and beliefs associated with them became "Tan tric," as opposed to "Vedic," "non-Tantric Buddhist," "non-Tantric Jain," "popular  Indian," "popular Chinese," "popular Japanese," and so on.  

When subjected to close scrutiny, these sorts of distinctions nearly always break  down. We may take as an example the multiple goddesses - called yoginis, dak inis, "vixen" spirits, and so on - that are found in nearly every Tantric tradition.  In the Indian context out of which so much of Tantra arose, cults of multiple  goddesses were already present, prior to the common era, in the apsarasas  (nymphs), yaksinis (female dryads), matrs (Mothers), and grahanis (female seiz ers), who were generally propitiated with animal sacrifices and early forms of  devotional worship. Although it is true that such powerful and petulant beings  (devouring when ignored, but nurturing when honored) were rarely if ever qual ified as high gods by the Hindu, Buddhist, or Jain elites, nevertheless, whenever  any woman - whether the wife of a brahman, king, or commoner - was about  to give birth, an image of one or more of these female deities would have been  painted on the walls of the birthing chamber. That these goddesses were main stream is further attested by the fact that such Mothers or female seizers as Sasthi  and Hariti were depicted on Kushan and Gupta-age coinage and sculpture  throughout greater India. Moreover, groups of goddesses of this type figure  prominently among the "export deities" that took root and flourished in foreign  soil, in Inner and East Asia - making theirs a truly cosmopolitan cult.  

When persons from every level of Asian society were worshiping these multiple  female deities, is it proper to call this a "folk" or "popular" cult? And where does  one draw the line between "indigenous" and "foreign"? Often the sole changes  that have historically occurred in the cults of these groups have been their group  name and the use to which they have been put in religious practice. Thus Putana,  one of the multiple Mothers or female seizers of Hindu epic tradition, is later  listed as a yogini in the Hindu Puranas and Tantras. The name Putana also appears  as the name of a class of disease demonesses in such Buddhist sources as the early  Mahayana Lotus of the True Law (Filliozat 1937: 160) and the early seventh-cen tury Chinese version of Collection of the Dharani Teachings (Strickmann 1996:  156). In these later developments, Putana the Hindu yogini or Putana the Bud 

dhist dakini is no longer merely propitiated as a means of preventing miscarriage  or childhood diseases; she has now become a part of the "enshrinement and  employment of demigods as instruments of power" (Sutherland 1991: 146) that  was and remains one of the hallmarks of Tantric practice. One calls her and her  dangerous host down upon oneself, and through ritual manipulation, compels  them to do one's bidding.  

This ritual strategy forms the core of the so-called Buddhist dharani texts (Mat sunaga 1987: 47-48), collections of spells and ritual techniques that, composed 

20 DAVID GORDON WHITE  

in India in the second to sixth centuries C.E,, were in the centuries that followed  the calling cards of the Tantric masters who became the most powerful and pres tigious ritualists of the Chinese imperial court (Strickmann 1996: 30). In Japan,  a Shingon legend concerning Kamatari, the seventh-century founder of the Fu jiwara lineage, relates that he was, in his youth, abducted by a vixen that was a  manifestation of a deity named Dakini. After having had sexual relations with the  vixen, he received from her the magic formula and the insignia of power (kama)  that became part of his name (Faure 1998: 262). In modern-day rural Japan,  certain types of vixens, termed "witch animals," are brought under the control of  solitary male ascetics through a rite formerly known as the Daten or Dagini rite  (Blacker 1975: 51-55) - this latter term clearly being a Japanese rendering of the  Sanskrit dakini. If it were possible to determine the precise dates of appropriations  such as this into an explicitly Tantric classification schema and body of practice,  one could, perhaps, pinpoint the century of the "origins" of this element of Tantra.  As this is impossible, however, I will close this digression by simply stating that  Tantra emerged out of the South Asian elite and popular mainstream some time  in the middle of the first millennium C.E.  

The origins of Tantra are, from both emic and etic perspectives, Indian. All  authentic Tantric lineages - of deities, scriptures, oral teachings, and teachers - claim to extend back to Indian sources. Perhaps the earliest reference to sects that  have subsequently come to be classified as Tantric is a passage from a fourth 

century C.E. portion of the great Hindu epic, the Mahabhdrata (12.335.40), which  names the (Saiva) Pasupatas and the (Vaisnava) Pancaratras as "non-Vedic." The  founders of every major Tantric tradition, school, or sect either trace their guru disciple lineages back to an Indian source or are considered to be incarnations of  bodhisattvas of Indian "origin." The exploded pantheon of Tantra - its principal  multiheaded and multiarmed deities and their burgeoning families or clans - are  generally Indian, or at least traceable to Indian prototypes. The same holds for  scriptural traditions: all Asian Tantric traditions are explicit concerning the Indian  origins of their teachings, and the transmission of their teachings from India; this  includes the Tibetan Treasure - gter ma, pronounced "terma" - traditions which,  while "discovered" in Tibet, were nonetheless "hidden" there by the Indian teach 

ers Vimalamitra and Padmasambhava [Germano-Gyatso]. Much of Tantric legend  concerns the Indian "shamanic culture heroes" (Samuel 1993: 19) known as Sid dhas or Mahasiddhas. The hieratic language of Tantra generally remains the San skrit of medieval Indian Hinduism and Buddhism. That is, for any lineage-based  Tantric body of practice (sddhana) to be legitimate in Chinese, Japanese, or Tibetan  Tantric traditions, its translated root text must be traceable back to a Sanskrit  original. In these translated sources, mantras - whose efficacy resides in their  sound shape - will not be translated but rather frozen (at least in theory) in the  original Sanskrit. Furthermore, Indic characters form the basis of the hieratic  Siddham script employed in Chinese and Japanese Tantric mandalas and texts.  The yogic practice that is so central to Tantra is also of Indian origin (albeit  influenced by Daoist techniques) - and the list goes on.  

As for the history of Tantra, it may be approached from both emic and etic 

INTRODUCTIO N 21  

perspectives. By way of presenting the problems of Tantric historiography, I begin  by presenting an emic dilemma in Japan. Here, of course, we are in the presence  of "export" Tantra, in this case Mahayana traditions brought to greater Asia from  India by monks and other religious specialists from the fifth century C.E. onward.  What we find, in fact, is that the historical time frame in which the transmission  (to China, Tibet, Korea, Japan, Southeast Asia) of various Indian Tantric para 

digms occurred has invariably proven definitive for the structure and content of  the "export" Tantric tradition in question. It is as if the original revelation re mained fossilized, like an insect in a block of amber, in the export tradition. This  is manifestly the case, for example, with Japanese Shingon - founded by Kukai  (774-835 C.E.) - whose core revelations are the seventh-century C.E. Mahavai 

rocana-sutra and the Tattvasamgraha-sutra. It was precisely these two south Indian  Mahayana texts - brought to China by Subhakarasiriha (637-735 C.E.) for the  Mahavairocana, and Vajrabodhi (671-741 C.E.) and Amoghavajra (eighth cen tury C.E.), for the Tattvasamgraha, and taught to him in China by Amoghavajra's  disciple Huiguo - that formed the core of Kukai's Shingon teachings. Shingon  practice remains, in many respects, a preserved specimen of those enshrined in  seventh-century Indian paradigms, but with a Japanese overlay. Following this  eighth-century watershed, subsequent Indian developments in Tantra had limited  or no impact on Shingon for four centuries (Matsunaga 1987: 50-52; Yamasaki  1988: 3-12, 19-20). Similarly, Tibetan Buddhism, with its preponderance of  Vajrayana practice based on revelations found in what would later be classified  as the Tantras of Yoga and Supreme Yoga, preserves the Tantric status quo of  eighth-century India, from which it was introduced into Tibet by the legendary  Vimalamitra and Padmasambhava.  

Shingon is one of the two most important mainstream forms of Japanese Tantra,  the other being Tendai, founded by Saicho (767-822 C.E.). Together, Shingon  and Tendai are widely considered to constitute mikkyo, the "esoteric Buddhism"  or "pure esotericism" of Japan. Here, mikkyo is held to be "pure" in contradis 

tinction to the "mixed esotericism" of Tantra, of which two medieval movements  were termed jakyo (heresies) (Faure 1998: 126). One of these, injected into Shin gon from Tibet via Chinese Daoism, was the Tachikawa-ryu [Faure]. In Tachi kawa - which equated sexual bliss with Kukai's doctrine of "bodily buddha hood" - Tantric practice took a new (for Shingon) highly sexualized coloring,  typical of Supreme Yoga Tantra consecrations (described in Snellgrove 1987:  257-61). Here, "Skull Ritual" initiations - real or imagined - that involved the  union of (male) Skill in Means and (female) Wisdom, enacted through sexual  intercourse and the subsequent collection of sexual fluids, were very close in style  to Hevajra and Candamaharosana Tantra-based consecrations that had, in the  tenth and eleventh centuries, been incorporated into the Tibetan Tantric "clerical"  mainstream. By the mid-thirteenth century, the doctrines of this school had be come so popular as to necessitate an orthodox Shingon backlash against the "Ta chikawa heresy," which culminated in its effective suppression by the late fifteenth  century (Sanford 1991: 1-4, 9-18; Strickmann 1996: 245).  

Yet, as Bernard Faure has indicated, Japanese mikkyo, like Indo-Tibetan Vaj-

22 DAVI D GORDO N WHIT E  

rayana, feminized a number of Buddhist deities; and ritual sex with them (or their  human substitutes) was part of the ritual. In the same vein, the Bizei betsu (Par ticular Notes on the Abhiseka) of Jien, an "orthodox" twelfth- to thirteenth-cen tury Tendai text, describes a cognate rite of sexual union between the emperor  and his consort, in the role of Tantric adepts (Faure 1998: 126). In spite of the  historical presence, within their own traditions, of these elements of Indo-Tibetan  Tantric practice, Shingon and Tendai apologists have for centuries tried to dis tance themselves from - if not deny the existence of - the darker magical (and  in particular sexual) components of Tachikawa-ryu and other Tantric "heresies."  How can their emic claims to purity prevail against the etic historical data pre sented here?  

Here, let us turn to a set of emic categories that, although they originated in  India, have been used widely to classify all the Buddhist Tantric sects and schools.  These are the categories of the Tantras of Action (Kriya Tantras), Tantras of Ob servance (Carya Tantras), Tantras of Yoga (Yoga Tantras), and Tantras of Supreme  Yoga (Anuttarayoga Tantras). These categories are used in reference to bodies of  revealed texts, ritual practice, and especially to types of consecration, with the  latter two being far more esoteric than the former two forms of Buddhist Tantric  practice. Within more esoteric Buddhist traditions, this means that Yoga and  Supreme Yoga consecrations follow or are "higher" than those of Action and  Observance. In the more conventional or exoteric Buddhist Tantric schools, these  Yoga and Supreme Yoga texts, rituals, and consecrations are simply omitted.  

This emic hierarchy or ordering does not, however, necessarily imply a his torical evolution. As Geoffrey Samuel (1993: 411-12) has argued, the Tantras of  Action and Observance, which grew up as extensions of ritual, yogic, and devo tional tendencies already present within earlier Mahayana traditions, were prob ably well ensconced within Indian Buddhist monastic communities by the eighth  and ninth centuries. As for the more esoteric and antinomian Tantras of Yoga and  Supreme Yoga - the core of Vajrayana Buddhism (so-called for its "diamond,"  that is, vajra, families of deities) - their origins were probably coeval with if not  prior to those of the Tantras of Action and Observance. However, these remained  the preserve of the more independent and solitary "shamanic" Siddha-type prac titioners until the tenth and eleventh centuries. For this reason, there are relatively  few texts of the Yoga and Supreme Yoga variety prior to their insertion, as "higher"  or more esoteric initiations, into "clerical" Tantric traditions. Whatever the case,  the patterns of development of these hierarchized revelations appear to fall into  lockstep with similar evolutions taking place within the Hindu Tantric schools in  India; this parallel evolution has been clearly delineated by Alexis Sanderson  (1988: 678-79) as follows:  

By the eighth century C.E. the Buddhists had accumulated a hierarchy of Tantric  revelations roughly parallel in its organisation and character to that of the [Hindu]  Mantramarga [whose textual canon comprises the Siva-Agamas and Rudra-Agamas of  the Saiva Siddhanta and the Bhairava-Agamas of Kapalika Saivism]. Their literature 

INTRODUCTIO N 23  

was divided in order of ascending esotericism into the Tantras of Action (kriya tantras), of Observance (carya-tantras), of Yoga (yoga-tantras), and Supreme Yoga  (yoganuttara-tantras). . . .  

[W]e can compare the relatively orthodox cult of the mild Vairocana Buddha in  the Tantras of Observance (Mahavairocanasutra, etc.) and Yoga (Jattvasamgraha, Par amadya, etc.) with the Saiva Siddhanta cult of Sadasiva, and the more esoteric and  heteropractic traditions of the Higher Yoga (Guhyasamaja, etc.), and Supreme Yoga  (Abhidhanottara, Hevajra, Dakinlvajrapanjara, etc.) with the [more orthoprax male 

deity-oriented] Mantrapitha and [the heteroprax female-deity-oriented] Vidyapitha of  the Tantras of Bhairava. Just as the Svacchandabhairava cult of the Mantrapitha is  transitional between the more exoteric Saiva Siddhanta and the Kapalika Vidyapitha,  so that of Aksobhya in the Higher Yoga stands bridging the gap between the Vairocana  cult and the feminised and Kapalika-like cults of Heruka, Vajravarahi and the other  khatvanga (skull-rattle)-bearing deities of the Supreme Yoga.  

At the lower levels of the Buddhist Tantric canon, there is certainly the influence  of the general character and liturgical methods of the Saiva and Pancaratra-Vaisnava  Tantric traditions. But at the final (and latest) level the dependence is much more  profound and detailed. As in the Vidyapitha cults these Buddhist deities are Kapalika  in an iconic form. They wear the five bone-ornaments and are smeared with ashes  (the six seals [mudras] of the Kapalikas). They drink blood from skull-bowls (kapala),  have the Saiva third eye, stand on the prostrate bodies of lesser deities, wear Siva's  sickle moon in their massed and matted hair (jata). And, just as in the Vidyapitha,  their cults are set in that of the Yoginis. Those who are initiated by introduction into  the mandalas of these Yogini-encircled Buddhist deities are adorned with bone-or naments and given the Kapalika's khatvanga and skull-bowl to hold.  

Sanderson goes on to argue that it was the Buddhists who borrowed from the  Hindus in these forms of Tantric practice, an argument that has been expanded  by Robert Mayer (1996: 102-32) with specific reference to Tibetan Buddhism.  This is not the place to discuss the issue of who borrowed from whom; the point  is that Tantra was a body of religious practice that evolved through similar phases  both within India and throughout its expansion into greater Asia. For any given  period, there has been a certain uniformity to Tantric practice that would have  been identifiable as "Tantra," both within India and across Asia.  

Within India, we may take the example of an early tenth-century Jain Tantra  entitled the Jvalini Kalpa. This text - which features yaksinis as consorts of the  tirthahkaras; Tantric sorcery (satkriya); yoga and alchemy; erotic practice involv ing the use of a female partner's sexual fluids as power substances (candali vijja);  use of mandalas, mudras, and mantras; nyasa (imposition of the deity's body on  the practitioner's); and cult of the Eight Mothers (Nandi, 1973: 147-67) - is in  nearly every respect identical to Hindu and Buddhist Tantric sources of the same  period. Nothing but the names of the deities invoked, visualized, or manipulated  in these practices is specifically Jain; all the features, however, are specific to tenth 

century Indian Tantra, whether Hindu, Buddhist, or Jain. Most of these "hard 

24 DAVID GORDON WHITE  

core" practices disappeared from Jain Tantra in the centuries that followed, just  as they did from Hindu and Buddhist Tantra; however, in this tenth-century  stratum, Jain, Hindu, and Buddhist Tantra were largely identical.  

Outside of India, we may return to the emic conundrum of the Japanese pro ponents of mikkyo, who have had to grapple with (or who more often simply  deny) the problem of the presence, within the historical development of their  own tradition, of elements of the Tachikawa "heresy." The same principle that  applies within Indo-Tibetan Buddhism also applies to "export" Tantra. Both the  exoteric Mahayana form of Tantra that was central to the formation of Shingon  in the eighth century and the esoteric Vajrayana form of Tantra central to Tachi kawa practice were forms of Tantric practice that were normative for their re spective times. In the light of this, the Shingon emic category of mikkyo as well  as the broader Tantric emic category of the four types of revelation (encompassing  both Shingon as "pure esotericism" and the Tachikawa "heresy") that fell within  the purview of some twelfth-century Shingon practices are both admissable, when  viewed through the etic lens of historical development.  

Tantric Actors  

Tantric actors, who include Siddhas, gurus or lamas, monks and nuns, yogins,  sorcerers, witches, rulers, royal preceptors and chaplains, spirit mediums, vision ary bards, oracles, astrologers, healers, and lay- or householder-practitioners, may  be classified into three main groups: Tantric specialists who have received initi ation into a textual, teaching lineage and their generally elite clients; Tantric spe cialists lacking in formal initiation, whose training tends to be through oral trans mission (or divine possession) alone, and their generally nonelite clients; and  householder or lay nonspecialists whose personal practice may be qualified as  Tantric. Although the third category is numerically the largest, lay or householder  Tantric practice is generally "soft core," and will therefore not enter significantly  into our discussion. There is overlap among these groups, of course, with house holder practitioners, for example, calling upon one or another type of specialist  for teachings, guidance, and ritual expertise and practice. The purview of the  Tantric actor par excellence, the Tantric ruler - usually a king or emperor but,  in the case of Tibet, a head of the monastic theocracy - covers all three of these  categories. Apart from the kings of Nepal and Bhutan, there are no Tantric rulers  remaining in the world, and it is perhaps for this reason that most twentieth century scholarly and popular accounts of Tantra tend to view it either as little  more than popular superstition or "sympathetic magic," on the one hand, or as  a sublime theoretical edifice on the other, without seeking to describe the rela tionship between these types of practice and their practitioners. In this final sec tion, I argue that the person and office of the Tantric ruler is the glue that holds  together all three levels or types of Tantric practice, without whom an integratedINTRODUCTIO N 25  

understanding of Tantra cannot be gained. As before, the Tantric mandala will  serve to map the tradition.  

The View from the Center  

In our working definition of Tantra, we identified the mandala as the hallmark  of Tantric theory and practice, the mesocosmic template through which the Tan tric practitioner transacts with and appropriates the myriad energies that course  through every level of the cosmos. Here, it is important to note that the mandala  was, in its origins, directly related to royal power. The notion of the king as  cakravartin - as both he who turns (vartayati) the wheel (cakra) of his kingdom  or empire from its center and he whose chariot wheel has rolled around its pe rimeter without obstruction - is one that goes back to the late Vedic period in  India. A cognate ideology of the emperor, the "son of Heaven," as center was  already in place in China in the same period. Basic to these constructions of  kingship is the notion that the king, standing at the center of his kingdom (from  which he also rules over the periphery) mirrors the godhead at the center of his  realm, his divine or celestial kingdom. However, whereas the godhead's heavenly  kingdom is unchanging and eternal, the terrestrial ruler's kingdom is only made  so through the "utopia" of the mandala. As such, the idealized "constructed king dom" of the mandala is the mesocosmic template between real landscapes, both  geographical and political (the protocosm) and the heavenly kingdom of the god head (metacosm), with the person of the king as god on earth constituting the  idealized microcosm. Ruling from his capital at the conceptual center of the uni verse, the king is strategically located at the base of the prime channel of com munication between upper and lower worlds, which he keeps "open" through  the mediation of his religious specialists.  

This royal ideology of "galactic polity" (Tambiah 1976: 102-31) or the "ex emplary center" comprising the king, his deity, and the capital city, has been  mediated by the mandala in nearly every premodern Asian political system. In  India, the practice of the mandala is tantamount to the royal conquest of the four  directions (digvijaya) which, beginning with a fire sacrifice (homa), has the king  process through the four compass points, around the theoretical perimeter of his  realm, before returning to his point of origin, which has now been transformed  into the royal capital and center of the earth (Sax 1990: 143,145). This last detail  is an important one, because it highlights the king's dual role as pivot between  heaven and earth. On the one hand, he is the microcosmic godhead incarnate,  ruling from the center; on the other, he is the protocosmic representative of  Everyman, struggling against myriad hostile forces that threaten him from the  periphery. It is here that, in terms of the mandala and Tantric practice in general,  the king constitutes the link that binds together elite and nonelite practitioners  and traditions.  

In reality, the king's hold on the mandala of his realm has often been more 

26 DAVI D GORDO N WHIT E  

Utopian than real. Conversely, given the intrinsically Utopian (belonging to "no place") nature of the mandala, Tantric practitioners have often flourished, or at  least survived, in situations of political anarchy or oppression; that is, in the  absence of a religiously sanctioned ruler. In this latter case, religious power, when  forced to operate on a clandestine level, controls the invisible forces of the uni verse from the hidden "center" of the tantrika's "peripheral" shrine, monastery,  or lodge. It is not for nothing that in India, the abbot of a powerful monastery or  leader of a religious order continues to be addressed, in the present day, as guru raja, "preceptor-king."  

In this sense, the Tantric practitioner is a crypto-potentate, transacting like a  king with the boundless energy of the godhead that flows from the elevated center  of his worship mandala. The early history of the Gaudiya Vaisnavas, arguably a  Tantric sect in its origins, is a remarkable example of this strategy. Finding them 

selves in a world without a Vaisnava king following the fall of the Gajapati dynasty  in Orissa in 1568 C.E., the Gaudiya Vaisnavas created a ritually ordered cosmos  for themselves in which the cultic centers of Nabadwip and Vrindaban came to  be identified, through the architectonics of the mandala, with the descent of the  celestial realm (dhaman) of the royal god Visnu/Krsna. Since that time, Gaudiya  Vaisnava practitioners have visualized themselves at the center of a Utopian king 

dom, meditatively envisioning the power relationship between features of these  cult centers' natural landscape and the divine realm of Krsna's Goloka heaven  (Stewart, 1995: 5).  

Here, then, we see that the utopia of the Tantric mandala may serve both to  ground legitimate royal authority and power when the king is a Tantric practi tioner, and to subvert illegitimate power or create a covert nexus of power when  the wrong king or no king is on the throne. This is precisely the strategy of the  present Dalai Lama's government in exile vis-a-vis the occupation of Tibet by the  People's Republic of China. The role of the lama in Tibetan Buddhist religious  polity stands out as a unique case in the history of Tantra inasmuch as the lamas  have actually exercised temporal power, governing, protecting, and working for  the enlightenment of their country and its people. This is a pattern that began in  the thirteenth century with the establishment of a relationship between the Sak yapa order and the Mongol emperors, whereby the former became the Tantric  initiators of the latter. In terms of religious ideology, however, this pattern goes  back to the twelfth century, at which time certain Nyingmapa "Treasure" scrip tures had begun to portray the seventh-century Tibetan monarch Song-tsen  Gampo as a Tantric manifestation of Avalokitesvara, and created an elaborate  national mythos around this theme (Kapstein 1992: 79-93). This was institu tionalized (also with Mongol support) with the establishment of the fifth Dalai  Lama as the temporal and spiritual ruler of Tibet in 1642; for the next 308 years,  the Gelugpa Dalai Lama, the incarnation of the celestial bodhisattva Avalokites vara, "ruled" Tibet from his Potala palace (Samuel 1993: 488, 527, 544). Since  1950, the mandala of the Dalai Lama's rule has once more become a Utopian one.  

In the entire history of Tantra, the Tibetan theocracy alone has succeeded in 

INTRODUCTIO N 27  

collapsing the three types of Tantric practitioners mentioned at the beginning of  this section - as well as the dual (spiritual and temporal) role of the Tantric  ruler - into the single person of the lama. In the remainder of the Tantric world,  the division of labor outlined above has remained the rule, with the royal courts  of Hindu and Buddhist kings constituting the privileged clienteles of Tantric spe 

cialists. This symbiotic relationship between Tantric "power brokers" and their  power-wielding royal patrons is particularly apparent in Tantric rituals of initia tion (diksa), and consecration or empowerment (abhiseka). Tantric consecration  has long been the special prerogative of Asian rulers. In fact, royal participation  in Tantric ritual colors the totality of Tantric literature; and "it is no mystery that  central ritual of Tantra - consecration - was modeled on the ancient Indian ritual  of royal investiture, [which] not only transformed monks into Tantric kings, but  also kings into Tantric masters" (Strickmann 1996: 40).  

In fact, abhiseka itself may well have had a sexual connotation, from the time  of the royal consecrations of the Vedic period. As Per Kvaerne has argued, the  verbal root of this term is sic, which means "sprinkle," "wet," "soak," and the  original sense of consecration was one of a hieros gamos, a sacred marriage be 

tween king and earth. As such, the distant origins of this core element of Tantric  practice may lie in a notion that the sex act and the ritual act were in some way  equivalent (Kvaerne 1975: 102-9). The practices of the Tachikawa-ryu that so  shocked the Shingon mainstream in Japan should also be viewed in this light: the  sexual symbolism of the imperial accession ceremony was the same as that of the  Tachikawa ritual, although it is not clear which influenced the other. These cult  practices may also have had a pre-Tantric precedent in Japan, in which the ancient  enthronement ceremony included a secret rite wherein an imitation of the hier ogamy between the emperor and a goddess may have been enacted with a sacred  prostitute (Faure 1998: 125-29, 169-70).  

In India as well, the role of the person of the queen - and of her sexual emis sion - as the source of her husband's energy is one that predates the emergence  of Tantra by several centuries. A particularly evocative description of such is found  in a ca. 100-300 C.E. Tamil poem, the Netunalvatai, which has been summarized  and interpreted by Dennis Hudson (1993: 133-34) as follows:  

Inside the house of the Pandya king there stood another "house," in which ananku,  the sexual and sacred power of the ur, the territory of his kingdom as a person, was  present. This house, called the karu ("embryo") - like the inner sanctum, the "womb  house" (garbha-grha) of the Hindu temple - was a bedroom into which the sole male  that entered was the king himself. In the place of the temple altar was a large round  bed replete with symbols of marital and fertile power. On the bed sat the queen,  naked save for her wedding necklace, awaiting her king who had gone into battle.  One of her maidservants prayed to the Mother goddess for his victory.  

The round bed is the round Vedic fire altar that symbolizes the earth and the  queen the Vedic fire, awaiting the oblation 5f soma-semen from her husband. Known  as "The Goddess Who Founds the Family" (kula-mutaltevi), she embodies the 

28 DAVI D GORDO N WHIT E  

"Mother" to whom the maidservant prays for victory, and the ananku that pervades  the fortress. That ananku, transmitted by her to the king each time they have sexual  intercourse (kutal), is carried inside of him as the sakti, the energy, that wins him  victory in battle.  

Yet the king must exile himself to the periphery of his kingdom, to the bor derlands where the battleline is constantly being drawn, to protect the center.  

The View from the Periphery  

As we have noted, the role of the king in the practice of the Tantric mandala is a  dual one. In Chinese parlance, the emperor is the "son of Heaven" when he rules  from the center of his palace in the heart of the middle kingdom; at the same  time, he is the representative of Everyman, battling to protect the periphery of  his realm against eruptions of barbarian demons, monsters, epidemics, and so on.  Here, it may be helpful to introduce the typology of the "transcendental" and  "pragmatic" aspects of religion. This typology, first proposed in the 1960s by the  anthropologist David Mandelbaum (1966) in relation to village-level religious  practice in India, should help us to understand the dual role of the Tantric king,  and serve as a theoretical bridge between what appear today to be two distinct  types of Tantric specialists and their clients, and two distinct and generally dis connected types of Tantric practice in Asia.  

When practitioners pay homage to the great gods of their tradition in the  controlled atmosphere of a religious festival or periodical ritual observance, this  is an example of a "transcendental" religion. When, however, an uncontrolled  epidemic breaks out in their village or territory, and the local or regional deity of  the disease in question is worshiped to protect and save them from their affliction,  this is an example of "pragmatic" religion. Tantric elites - kings and their priestly  specialists, householder practitioners, and so on - will generally take a "transcen dental" approach to their religion, transacting with high gods through the con 

trolled template of the mandala. On the other hand, Tantric specialists from lower  levels of society - healers, exorcists, spirit-mediums, and so on - will generally  be called upon by their clients for their "pragmatic" abilities to transact with a  malevolent spirit world that has already erupted into their lives, far away from  the mandala's quiet center. By and large, the transcendental approach is proactive,  while the pragmatic approach is reactive.  

From the transcendent perspective, the mandala is a Utopia ("no-place") as  geometrically perfect as the Hindu Sri Yantras or Tibetan Buddhist sand mandalas.  But real life always occurs "someplace," and it is here, at the pragmatic fringes,  that the world of the mandala becomes somewhat messier. More than any other  Tantric actor, the king is obliged to adopt both transcendental and pragmatic  strategies in his transactions through the mandala. We have already outlined the  transcendental side of his practice: in the latter role, he is Everyman, not only  because he is the representative and protector of every one of his people, but also  because he is himself his own person, subject to many of the same trammels of 

INTRODUCTIO N 29  

existence as everyone else in his realm. Like them, he has a home and a family,  a body that is prey to disease and death, and deceased relations who come to visit  him in his dreams. In this respect, he must transact with the same gods, ghosts,  and ancestors as have most Asian individuals from time immemorial - beings  which, because they are closer to the human world than are the high gods, are  generally viewed as having a more immediate impact on human life.  

Most pragmatic religious life in Asia revolves around family gods, that is, those  deceased family members, distant or recent, who have died untimely or unusual  deaths. Such a death has barred their path to the protected world of the ances tors - the happy dead - and as such, these unhappy and unsettled spirits find  themselves condemned to a marginal and dangerous existence. Because these  spirits inhabit the world between the living and the dead, they are most readily  encountered in the places at which they departed from this world: graveyards and  charnel- and cremation- grounds [McDaniel]. As such, these sites become the  privileged venues of certain types of pragmatic Tantric practice (exorcism, sub 

jugation, killing, and so on), and are described in gruesome detail in Tantric  literature and graphically illustrated on the lower portions or borders of Buddhist  mandala art, in particular.  

In their unhappy situation, these beings will often seek to avenge themselves  against their family, clan, or village, and so become malevolent ghosts, the bhut prets of India or kuei of China. The semantic field of this latter term is particularly  telling, extending as it does to not only the mesocosm of the household and the  malevolent deities that threaten it but also to that of the empire, and the barbarian monsters (kuei) that would overrun the center were the king's armies not vigilantly  patrolling the periphery. The protean horde of these lesser deities form or hem  in the outermost fringes of the great mandala that the king, as an incarnation of  the godhead, rules from the center. Yet it is one and the same mandala, the same  mesocosm of interpenetrating energies; all that changes is the perspective from  which it is viewed.  

Over the past two millennia, Asian traditions have generated a remarkably  unified taxonomy of these malevolent deities, based for the most part on origin,  form, and function. They are a highly volatile and capricious group, by turns  hostile and friendly, terrible and benign, semidemonic and semidivine, with  changes in demeanor corresponding directly to the ritual attention given them by  humans. Capable of changing bodily containers - that is, of possessing the bodies  of both the living and dead - their host fills the sky, earth, waters, stones, and  trees, as well as the bodies of every type of living creature. Their names are legion,  as are their forms and functions. In South Asia alone, one encounters - across  Hindu, Buddhist, Jain, and Muslim traditions alike - cults of and practices relat ing to female yoginis, dakinis, Saktis, Mothers, yaksinis, raksasis, pisacinis, and  vidyarajnis; and male bhairavas, Siddhas, viras, ganas, bhutas, pretas, vetalas,  raksasas, pisacas, maras, and vidyarajas. Many of these classes of beings were  carried from India, in the first wave of export Tantric literature and liturgies, into  Inner and East Asia, where they came to jostle and often merge with already 

30 DAVI D GORDO N WHIT E  

existing indigenous pantheons. They continue to be found in myriad regional and  vernacular forms throughout all of Asia. Yet, as has already been stated, we must  not conclude from this that Asian belief systems and practices concerning these  hosts of beings constitute the "origins" of Tantra. They have always been with the  Asian peoples: when their cults became "tantric" - or when "Tantra" emerged  out of their cult practices - is a chicken/egg question that is impossible to resolve.  

At the pragmatic outer fringes of the mandala, possession, exorcism, divination,  and healing have historically been the most pervasive forms of Tantric practice  [Erndl], and it has been in their roles as ritual healers, "psychoanalysts," clair voyants, and ground-level problem solvers [Walter] that nonelite Tantric spe cialists - whether they be called Ojhas or Bhopas in India, Good-pas (pronounced  "chopa") in Tibet, or even Daoists in China, or Shinto priests in Japan - first  established and have continued to maintain their closest ties with every level of  Asian society. The dark counterpart to these practices is ritual sorcery or black  magic, the manipulation of the same low-level deities or demons to strike down  enemies with the same afflictions as those they are called upon to placate or  eliminate. Most often, practitioners gain access to and control over these malev olent deities by entering into a possessed state or mediumistic trance, and it must  be allowed that at this level, Tantric specialists rarely make explicit use of the  mandala. Nonetheless, it informs their practice, since they know themselves to  be transacting with deities that are in some way the emanations, sons, daughters,  or servants of the transcendent godhead at the distant center. This is the case, for  example, with the multiple Bhairavas of popular Hindu traditions in South Asia.  In Jain Tantric practice, these beings are termed "unliberated deities," as opposed  to the enlightened and liberated tirthankaras [Cort]; in Buddhist Tantra, they are  conceived as ordinary worldly deities who have vowed to protect the Dharma, as  opposed to enlightened buddhas or bodhisattvas.  

We should bear in mind here that the transcendent/pragmatic religion typology  is just that: an ideal construct employed to classify types of Tantric practice. In  fact, the world of Tantric practice is a continuum that draws on both the tran scendent and the pragmatic approaches. This is the strategy of the Tibetan lamas,  who are both teachers of the Dharma and protectors of their people from malev olent deities. Lay practitioners too will often combine the two approaches, ap pealing directly to semidivine intermediaries for protection and succor in their  daily lives while focusing their meditative practice on the godhead at the center  of the mandala. An example of such a combinatory practice is the preliminary  Tantric ritual process known as bhutasuddhi, the "cleansing of the five elements"  but also "the purging of the demonic beings." Prior to meditatively constructing  the god at the center of the worship mandala, and then identifying it with their  own subtle bodies, practitioners must first purge their bodies of these lower ele ments/malevolent beings (bhutas). In some Hindu practice, this process culmi nates in the dramatic expulsion of a black "Sin Man" (papapurusa) - a conden sation of all the malevolent beings inhabiting the mandalic mesocosm of his  body - through the practitioner's left nostril.  

What differentiates elite Tantric specialists from their nonelite counterparts is 

INTRODUCTIO N 31  

not the basic structure of the mandala as transactional mesocosm, but rather the  name and attributes of the deities with whom they transact. Elite practitioners - by virtue of their higher Tantric empowerments, textual lineages, and formal  instruction - are able to transact with the supreme transcendent-yet-immanent  deity of the Tantric universe at the center to control all of the beings of the  mandala - divine, semidivine, and demonic - for the protection the king, his  court, and the state as a whole. The principal deity with whom the nonelite  specialist or practitioner will interact - some low-level "lord of spirits" - will not  be absent from the elite mandala; rather, he or she will be relegated to a zone  nearer to the periphery of that mandala, as a fierce protector deity guarding the  mandala of the king's (and supreme deity's) Utopian realm from incursions by  malevolent spirits from the outside, that is, enemies.  

In this, his protective role, the ruler will call upon his elite Tantric specialists  to perform rituals generally considered to fall within the purview of their nonelite  counterparts (or, in some cases, simply call upon the latter to perform them).  "Binding the directions" (dig-bandhana) to fence out demons from the mandala,  a standard preliminary to nearly every type of Tantric ritual, is a practice that  betrays this concern with the dangerous boundary between inside and outside,  "us" and "them" [Gardiner]. Yet this is but one of a body of ritual technologies - for driving away, immobilizing, confusing, and annihilating "demonic" enemies  of the state - that elite Tantric specialists have marshaled on behalf of their royal  clients for over a millennium. From this royal perspective as well, the fierce and  heavily armed deities pictured at the borders and gates of the Tantric mandalas  are recognized as protectors of the realm. Very often, those fierce deities have  been female - circles of wild animal- or bird-headed goddesses - a reminder once  again that the activated energy that flows through the Tantric mandala is nearly  always feminine.  

Contributions to this volume amply illustrate this intimate relationship between  various types of Tantric specialists, their royal clients, and the protection of the  state throughout Asia, including Tang China [Orzech-Sanford], Heian Japan [Gra pard], Malla Nepal [Bledsoe], and Kalacuri central India [Davis]. Here, elite ritual  technologies have been backed up by military force: as in the West, fighting  monastic orders have long been a part of the Asian landscape, and the orders in  question, in both South and East Asia, have generally been Tantric (Strickmann  1996: 41; Lorenzen 1978: 61-75). In South Asia, tantrikas were power brokers  throughout the medieval period, and one may even see in the presence, in the  early 1990s, of the Nath Siddha leader Avaidyanath on the ruling council of the  Hindu-nationalist organization known as the Visva Hindu Parisad, an attempt to  reclaim that role in postcolonial India (White 1996: 304-13; 342-49).  

Where is the Mainstream?  

Throughout this essay, I have made ambiguous use of the term "mainstream,"  sometimes referring to the "Tantric mainstream" and at others contrasting Tantric  with non-Tantric "mainstream" practices, albeit with the mitigating heuristic de-

32 DAVID GORDON WHITE  

vice of "hard-core" and "soft-core" Tantra. This ambiguity is one that flows (to  stay with a fluid metaphor) from the ambiguity of the Tantric mandala itself. As  has been argued, the Tantric mandala becomes "utopian" when there is no tem poral ruler to be identified with the godhead at the center. In such cases, Tantra  is outside the mainstream, potentially subversive and antinomian, the province  of the practitioner as crypto-potentate. When, however, the ruler is himself a  Tantric practitioner/client, then the mandala takes on a real-world referent, and  stands as the mesocosmic template between politicoreligious realities and their  metacosmic prototype, the realm of the divine. In the first instance, the Tantric  mandala is covert and occulted; in the latter, it is overt and hegemonic. The  anonymous author of the Agama Prakasa [Rinehart-Stewart] states this aphoris 

tically: "Every city has one-fourth part of its population as Saktas [that is, tantri kas] - and the ceremonies are performed very secretly in the middle of the night;  if a king be a supporter, they are also observed publicly."  

It is this bivalency of the portable Tantric mandala that has both ensured the  survival of Tantra in times of religious and political subjugation and rendered an  accounting of it so difficult for the scholar. When the king is a Tantric practitioner,  Tantra is a protective bulwark of the state, and its specialists are power-brokering  bearers of religious authority. Geoffrey Samuel (1993: 34) sums up this situation  in the following terms: "[A] practitioner can relate directly to the sources of power  and authority, by contacting the Tantric 'deities' and other central 'culture-heroes.'  Once the practitioner becomes a lama, this direct contact with power legitimates  a social role that can as easily extend into the political sphere." When, however,  there is no ruler, or when the "wrong king" is on the throne, the Tantric specialist  becomes a covert operative, an occult cosmocrat, controlling a universe in which  he is, through his identity with the god at the center of the mandala, the creator,  preserver, and destroyer. This latter state of affairs is, of course, threatening to  the "wrong king" in question, and Siddha mythology is replete with accounts of  the triumph of Tantric masters over wrong-headed temporal rulers. There are,  however, other possible scenarios, giving rise to other strategies on the part of  Tantric actors, which need to be explored. These concern relationships among  power elites - Tantric specialists and their royal or aristocratic clients - in which  the former, whether they consider their royal client to be legitimate or not, seek  to find ways by which to assert their authority over the latter. These are the  strategies of secrecy and dissimulation.  

Until recent times, Tantric ritual constituted a bulwark for the state in the  Indianized and Sanskritized monarchies of Asia, from Nepal to Bali (Strickmann  1996: 348). Reciprocally, it has especially been through royal support (protection,  land grants, tax-exempt status, and so on) that the various Tantric orders have  been empowered both to propagate their sectarian teachings and to consolidate  their socioeconomic position in the realm. In this symbiotic relationship, Tantric  lineages - of families, teaching traditions, and royal, priestly, and monastic suc 

cession - have often been closely intertwined. It is particularly in Nepal - where  the royal preceptor (raj guru) has, since the thirteenth century, been the king's 

INTRODUCTIO N 33  

chief religious advisor, initiating his royal client into the circles of deities that  comprise and energize the nepala-mandala (Toffin 1989: 24-25) - that the re lationship between the tantrika and his king has remained in force down to the  present day.  

This modern-day survival of a medieval Tantric legacy has been the subject of  the important research of Mark Dyczkowski, the fruits of which will appear  shortly in the context of a forthcoming massive study of the Kubjika Tantras.  According to Dyczkowski's analysis, control of the cult of the great royal goddess  Taleju (whose secret worship and liturgies are based on those of the Tantric Hindu  goddess Kubjika) lies at the heart of the power relationship between that goddess's  Newar priesthood and the royal family of Nepal. After reviewing the cults of the  gods of the Newars' public religion, the gods of the "civic space" or "mesocosm"  (Levy 1992), Dyezkowski (2000: 2-3) presents the following scenario:  

But there is an inner secret domain which is the Newars' "microcosm." This does not  form a part of the sacred geography of the Newar civis, although, from the initiate's  point of view, it is the source and reason for much of it. The deities that populate  this "inner space" and their rites are closely guarded secrets and, often, they are the  secret identity of the public deities known only to initiates. The two domains com 

plement each other. The outer is dominantly male. It is the domain of the attendants  and protectors of both the civic space and the inner expanse, which is dominantly  female. In the public domain . . . the male dominates the female, while the secret  lineage deities of the higher castes [of the elite Tantric specialists] are invariably female  accompanied by male consorts. . . . The inner domain is layered and graded in hier 

achies of deepening and more elevated esotericism that ranges from the individual  to the family group, clan, caste, and out through the complex interrelationships that  make up Newar society. Thus the interplay between the inner and outer domains is  maintained both by the secrecy in which it is grounded and one of the most char 

acteristic features of Newar Tantrism as a whole, namely, its close relationship to the  Newar caste system.  

The outer domain is that of the pragmatic boundary of the mandala, discussed  earlier; here, the multiple Bhairabs (Bhairavas) who guard the boundaries of vil lages, fields, and the entire Kathmandu Valley itself are so many hypostases of  the great Bhairabs of the royal cultus: Kal Bhairab, Akas Bhairab, and so on. As  we have noted, however, it is only by transacting with the transcendent deity at  the heart of the mandala that one gains and maintains supreme power. Here  secrecy becomes a prime strategy. The Taleju brahmans offer Bhairava initiations  to the king as the maintainer of the outer, public state cultus; however, it is only  among themselves that they offer initiations and empowerments specific to their  lineage goddess - and it is precisely through these secret initiations and empow erments that they maintain their elevated status vis-a-vis all the other castes in  the Kathmandu Valley, including that of their principal client, the king himself.  Because the goddess at the center of that mandala is their lineage goddess, and  theirs alone, and because her higher initiations are their secret prerogative, the 

34 DAVI D GORDO N WHIT E  

Newar priesthood is able to "control" the king and the nepala-mandala as a whole.  Higher levels of initiation into the Kubjika Tantras, accessible only to these elite  tantrikas, afford them hegemony over the religious life of the kingdom, which  translates into an occult control of the Nepal royal administration - the political  edifice that protects the kingdom from all malevolent spirits, both internal and  external - which in turn enhances their social status and economic situation. A  comparison with the world of espionage is perhaps useful: only those of the  privileged inner circle (heart of the Tantric mandala) have the highest security  clearance (Tantric initiations) and access to the most secret codes (Tantric man tras) and classified documents (Tantric scriptures). The Taleju brahmans of Kath 

mandu, tantrikas to the king, are the "intelligence community" of the kingdom,  and their secret knowledge affords them a symbolic and real power greater than  that of the king himself. In this way, the political power that the Newars lost  through the eighteenth-century invasion of the Kathmandu Valley by the founder  of the Shah dynasty has been recovered through their control of the goddess at  the heart of the royal mandala and their control of the administration of the  kingdom.  

When one looks at the strategy of secrecy employed by the Taleju brahmans  of Nepal to exert occult control over a kingdom whose political power they lost  over two centuries ago, one is not far from the practice of dissimulation, of pre tending to be someone other than who one is. Dissimulation is a particular strat egy for maintaining secrecy that is most often employed when the "wrong king"  is on the throne, and practitioners are forced "underground." Basically the same  aphorism, found in both Hindu and Buddhist Tantric traditions, expresses this  strategy: "outwardly Vedic, a Saiva at home, secretly a Sakta [that is, a tantrika]";  "externally a Hinayana, internally a Mahayana, secretly a Vajrayana," in the Bud dhist version. This strategy is altogether comprehensible in a situation of political  or religious oppression. Curiously, or not so curiously, it is a strategy employed  in times of relative freedom, as well. This is the stuff secret societies are made of  the world over. The question of why one would wish to dissemble when fear  of oppression is not one's principal motivation may again be approached by  borrowing terminology from the world of espionage. Dissimulation allows for  covert operatives to possess a double (or triple) identity, and to inhabit more than  one world at the same time. It is also a means for "insiders" to recognize one  another without being recognized by "outsiders," through the use of secret signs  (mudras), language (mantras), codes (forms of mantric encryption), and so on. It  is a means for creating an elite, even if its eliteness is known to none but the  insider community.  

The Broken World of Tantra  

The Tantric ruler is the Tantric actor par excellence, with galactic polity operating  on the level of mandalas of deities as well as that of agglomerations of peoples,  clans, and territorial units. The royal palace is located at the center of a mandalaINTRODUCTIO N 35  

that is the master grid controlling and encompassing all the beings - human,  subhuman, and superhuman - within its purview; at the same time, the king  polices and protects the boundaries of his royal mandala from outside incursions.  As such, the office and person of the king have constituted the vital link between  elite and nonelite forms of Tantric practice. Without him, the center is missing,  and the phenomenon that is Tantra becomes cloven into two bodies of practice - the one transcendent and quietistic and the other pragmatic and "shamanistic" - that appear to have little or no relationship to one another. Yet, as we have noted,  with the possible exceptions of Bhutan, Nepal (now a constitutional monarchy),  and Tibet (a theocracy in exile), there are no Tantric systems of galactic polity  remaining on the planet.  

What effect has this loss of the center had on Tantra? Generally speaking, it  has apparently split Tantra into two bodies of practice whose connections are  barely recognizable to either practitioners or scholars. On the one hand, the pow erful Tantric rites of subjugation, immobilization, annihilation, and so on - the  "Six Practices" or "Six Rites of Magic" (satkarmdni) [Buhnemann] - have become  the sole province of individuals practicing for their own prestige and profit, or  on behalf of other individuals on a for-cash basis. In the absence of state patron age, deployment of these ritual technologies often amounts to little more than  black magic. When no longer employed in the service of the state, what had  previously been a coherent body of practice for the state's protection can appear  to be little other than a massive "protection racket" against supernatural thugs. It  is in this context that many Hindus in India today deny the relevance of Tantra  to their tradition, past or present, and identify what they call "tantra-mantra" as  so much mumbo-jumbo.  

The second body of practice that has emerged from this loss of a political center  generally involves Tantric elites. When there no longer is a royal client to support  them, many of those elite specialists who had been royal chaplains or preceptors  have tended to turn their energies toward "perfecting" the rituals and liturgies for  which a performance arena no longer exists. Closed into monasteries or other  conventicles, these specialists have tended to scholasticize Tantric theory and  internalize, sublimate, or semanticize external Tantric practice. Taken to its ex 

treme, this scholasticizing tendency has removed Tantra from its this-worldly  concerns and transformed it into an idealized and intellectualized inner exercise  generally reserved for an elite group of insiders. Minutely categorizing every facet  of the universe of experience and practice is the mark of scholasticist Tantra, and  a great number of the passages translated in this volume betray that mindset. This  tendency has been further catalyzed by a gradual loss of touch with the original  clan lineage-based ground for Tantric ritual (Gupta-Hoens-Goudriaan 1979: 124;  White 1998: 192-95).  

There have been two major upshots of these developments. On the one hand,  much of Tantra has become highly philosophical, and many of the most brilliant  Tantric summa have been the work of "pure theoreticians." Even when the lan guage of such forms of Tantra remains antinomian, this is a purely ritual or 

36 DAVI D GORDO N WHIT E  

philosophical antinomianism, one cut off from the outside world, that is being  espoused. On the other, as we have already noted, Tantric specialists have often,  in the absence of politically powerful patrons, adopted the strategy of dissimu lation, of hiding their "true" Tantric identity behind a facade of conventional  behavior in the public sphere. In this context, elite "Tantra has moved towards  the doctrinally orthodox and politically unobjectionable. . . . The magical and  shamanic powers have lost their importance, the 'disreputable' sexual practices  are avoided, and Tantric ritual has become little more than a supplement to the  ordinary Brahmanic cult. Much the same . . . appears to be true for Buddhist  Tantra among the Newars of the Kathmandu Valley, and in Japan, and for both  Buddhist and Hindu Tantra in Bali" (Samuel 1993: 432).  

These two strategies, of appropriating Tantric ritual technologies as means to  self-promotion, and of dissimulation combined with scholasticist theorization,  only appear to be the legacy of two different traditions. In fact, they are two sides  of the same coin; however, the coin is one that no longer bears a royal head or  device on its face. Such is the broken world of Tantra at the dawn of the new  millennium.  

 #### Works Cited  

Blacker, Carmen (1975). The Catalpa Bow, A Study of Shamanistic Practices in japan. London:  George Allen and Unwin.  

Brooks, Douglas Renfrew (1992). "Encountering the Hindu 'Other': Tantrism and the Brah mans of South India," Journal of the American Academy of Religion 60.3 (Fall): 405-36.  Dowman, Keith (1980). The Divine Madman: The Sublime Life and Songs of Drukpa Kunley.  London: Rider).  

Dyczkowski, Mark (1999). "The Sacred Geography of the Kubjika Tantras with Reference  to the Bhairava and Kaula Tantras." Nepal Research Center Journal.  

(2000). "Kubjika, Kali, Tripura, and Trika." Manuscript.  

Faure, Bernard (1998). The Red Thread: Buddhist Approaches to Sexuality. Princeton: Prince ton University Press).  

Filliozat, Jean (1937). Le Kumaratantra de. Ravana et les textes paralleles indiens tibetains,  chinois, camhodgien et arabe. Cahiers de la Societe Asiatique, 1st series, vol. 4. Paris:  Imprimerie Nationale.  

Gupta, Sanjukta, Dirk Jan Hoens, and Teun Goudriaan (1979). Hindu Tantrism. Leiden: E.  J. Brill.  

Hudson, Dennis (1993). "Madurai: The City as Goddess." In Urban Form and Meaning in  South Asia: The Shaping of Cities from Prehistoric to Precolonial Times, edited by Howard  Spodek and Doris Meth Srinivasan. Washington, D.C.: National Gallery of Art, pp. 125 - 42.  

Kapstein, Matthew (1992). "Remarks on the Mani bka'-'bum and the Cult of Avalokitesvara  in Tibet." Tibetan Buddhism: Reason and Revelation, edited by Steven D. Goodman and  Ronald M. Davidson. Albany: State University of New York Press, pp. 79-93.  

Kvaerne, Per (1975). "On the Concept of Sahaja in Indian Buddhist Tantric Literature."  Temenos 11, pp. 88-135. 

INTRODUCTION 37  

Levy, Robert (1992). Mesocosm: Hinduism and the Organization of a Traditional Newar City  in Nepal. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.  

Lorenzen, David (1978). "Warrior Ascetics in Indian History." Journal of the American  Oriental Society 98 (January-March) 61-75.  

Mandelbaum, David (1966). "Transcendental and Pragmatic Aspects of Religion. "American  Anthropologist 68 (October): 1,175-91.  

Matsunaga, Yukei (1987). "From Indian Tantric Buddhism to Japanese Buddhism." In  Japanese Buddhism: Its Tradition, New Religions and Interaction with Christianity, edited by  Minoru Kiyota. Tokyo: Buddhist Books International, pp. 47-54.  

Mayer, Robert (1996). A Scripture of the Ancient Tantra Collection, The Phur-pa bcu-gnyis.  Oxford: Kiscadale Publications.  

Nandi, Ramendra Nath (1973). Religious Institutions and Cults in the Deccan. Delhi: Motilal  Banarsidass.  

Newman, John (1985). "A Brief History of Kalacakra." In The Wheel of Time: The Kalacakra  in Context, edited by Beth Simon. Madison, Wise: Deer Park Books, pp. 51-90.  Orofino, Giacomella (1997). "Apropos of Some Foreign Elements in the Kalacakratantra."  In Tibetan Studies: Proceedings of the 7th Seminar of the International Association for Tibetan  Studies, Graz, 1995, edited by H. Krasser, M. T. Much, E. Steinkellner, and H. Tauscher.  Vienna: Osterreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften. Vol. 2, pp. 717-24.  Padoux, Andre (1986). "Tantrism." In Encyclopedia of Religions, edited by Mircea Eliade.  New York: Macmillan. Vol. 14, pp. 272-76.  

Samuel, Geoffrey (1993). Civilized Shamans, Buddhism in Tibetan Societies. Washington,  D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.  

Sanderson, Alexis (1988). "Saivism and the Tantric Tradition." In The World's Religions,  edited by Stewart Sutherland et al. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, pp. 660-704.  (1995). "Meaning in Tantric Ritual." In Essais sur le rituel, III (Colloque du Cen tenaire de la Section des Sciences Religieuses de l'Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes),  edited by Anne-Marie Blondeau and Kristofer Schipper. Louvain-Paris: Peeters, pp. 15- 95.  

Sanford, James H. (1991). "The Abominable Tachikawa Skull Ritual." MonumentaNipponica  46.1 (Spring), pp. 1-20.  

Sax, William S. (1990). "The Ramnagar Ramlila: Text, Performance, Pilgrimage." History  of Religions 30.4 (November): 129-53.  

Sircar, Dinesh Chandra (1973). The Sakta Pithas. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.  Snellgrove, David (1987). Indo-Tibetan Buddhism: Indian Buddhists and Their Tibetan Suc cessors. Vol. 1. Boston: Shambhala.  

Stein, R. A. (1988). Grottes-matrices et lieux saints de la deesse en Asie orientale. Paris: Ecole  Francaise d'Extreme Orient.  

Stewart, Tony (1995). "Mandala and Utopia in Gaudlya Vaisnavism," Paper read at the  University of Virginia, March 1995.  

Strickmann, Michel (1996). Mantras et mandarins. Le bouddhisme tantrique en Chine. Paris:  Gallimard.  

Sutherland, Gail Hinich (1991). The Disguises of the Demon: The Development of the Yaksa  in Hinduism and Buddhism. Albany, NY.: State University of New York Press.  Tambiah, Stanley (1976). World Conquerer and World Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism and  Polity in Thailand against a Historical Background. Cambridge: Cambridge University  Press.  

Toffin, Gerard (1989). "La Voie des heros: Tantrisme et heritage vedique chez les 

38 DAVI D GORDO N WHIT E  

brahmanes rajopadhyaya du Nepal." In Pretrise, Pouvoirs et Autorite en Himalaya (Pu rusdrtha 12), edited by Veronique Bouillier and Gerard Toffin. Paris: Editions de  1'EHESS, pp. 19-40.  

White, David Gordon (1996). The Alchemical Body: Siddha Traditions in Medieval India.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.  

(1998). "Transformations in the Art of Love: Kamakala Practices in Hindu Tantric  and Kaula Traditions." History of Religions 38.4 (November): 172-98.  Yamasaki, Taiko (1988). Shingon: Japanese Esoteric Buddhism. Boston: Shambhala. 