+++
title = "1"

+++
<details><summary>शङ्करः</summary>\n\n$1\n</details>



[^1]: There are innumerable instances both in the past and in the present of the narrow relationship between economics and religion in India. The large Hindu temples are very rich, and some rites are very costly, so much so that temple priests today are sometimes not fully initiated because they cannot afford the financial cost of a *dīkṣā* . 



[^2]: The Dī glosses *saṁketa* by several words, among which is *samaya* , which means not only agreement but also a conventional rule or practice or an observance. 

[^3]: A triangle apex downward is the usual symbol of the *yoni* , the feminine sexual organ, which is also called *janmasthāna* , the place of birth. 



[^4]: On these notions, see the commentary below on *śl* . 40. 



[^5]: The text has *ātmanā* , a dual form, meaning two *ātmans* . But the Dī interprets this as referring to the “four *ātmans* ,” four aspects of the Absolute Self, a notion found in some Upaniṣads \(see, for instance, the Ātmopaniṣad\). These *ātmans* are: *ātman* , the Absolute, the Brahman; *antarātman* , the inner self who enjoys the world; *parāmātman* , the supreme Self, the level of the subtle living creature \(*sūkṣmajīva* \); and *jñānātman* , which is the Brahman as nonseparate from the living being \( *jīvābhinna* \). 

[^6]: There is no sanskrit term for religion, a notion that is foreign to traditional India. For Hindus, the *dharma* regulates the social and what we would call the religious aspect of their life. 



[^7]: Their names are given in chapter 2, *śl* . 3–5. 

[^8]: *Pramā* or *pramāna* means, in fact, measure: the subject “measures” the world, which is the work of *māyā* , a word whose root is *MĀ* , to measure. 

[^9]: *Citkalā* could be more precisely translated as a limiting dynamism, for *kalā* , in shaivism, is a limiting form of energy or power to act, a dividing or parceling energy. 

[^10]: The Sanskrit *śaktyādi* could also be understood as “the first \( *ādi* \), which is *śakti*” \(this is how Bhāskarāya understands it\). There are, in any case, not ten but nine letters between *YA* and *KSA* ; the exact meaning of this passage is therefore uncertain. 

[^11]: The forty-nine phonemes of the Sanskrit alphabet are, in their traditional order \(the *varṇasamāmnāya* \): sixteen “vowels,” from *A* to the aspirate *visarga* ; then twenty-fi ve consonants, in fi ve groups \( *varga* \) of fi ve, classifi ed according to their places of articulation, from the throat to the lips \(guttural, palatal, cerebral, dental, labial\), ordered in each group according to their phonetic characteristics \(voiced, voiceless, aspirate, nasal\); then four “semivowels,” *YA* , *RA* , *LA* , *VA* ; then three sibilants; and fi nally, the aspirate *HA* , to which is added the consonantal group *KṣA* , so as to have fifty letters. The reader will note that the Sanskrit alphabet is not in a complete phonetic disorder, as is our own, but 

168



is shown \(for more than two thousand years\) in a logical and phonologically grounded order, an order that European linguists discovered only about two hundred years ago. 

[^12]: The name *krodhīśa* is given to *KA* because, in the ritual placing \( *nyāsa* \) on the body of the fifty Rudras \(called *śrīkaṇṭhādinyāsa* \), which is done together with the fifty letters of the alphabet, the Rudra Krodhīśa is to be placed with *KA* . 

[^13]: Those are twelve *tattvas* corresponding to the mind and the senses of human beings. 

[^14]: On the *kāmakalā* , see note 34 in the introduction, above. We shall come back to the subject later \( chapter 2, *śl* . 21\). For a theoretical and well-informed study of the subject, see David G . White , “Transformations of the Art of Love: K ā makal ā 



Practice in Hindu Tantric and Kaula Traditions,” 



History of Religions 





*38*\(November 1998 \): 172–198 , or his book,* Kiss of the Yoginī: “Tantric Sex” in Its* *South Asian Contexts* \( Chicag o: University of Chicago Press , 2003 \) . 

[^15]: A *mora* \( *mātra* \) is a prosodic instant. It is defi ned in traditional Indian phonetics as the length of time required to pronounce a short vowel. 

[^16]: To associate a particular visual aspect to the infi nitely subtle planes of phonic energy of the *kalās* may seem surprising. These are, however, traditional notions. They are shown on the table of the *japa* of the *śrīvidyā* at the end of the Adyar edition and English translation of Bhāskararāya’s *Varivasyāprakāśa* \(Adyar, 1948\). 

[^17]: The term thus translated \(in fact, mistranslated\) is *vapus* , which means shape, appearance, or body but not an ordinary body—a beautiful one, the body or apparition of a deity. It evokes, too, the essence of something, notably when it is contemplated in deep meditation \( 

*b ḥ avanā*\)or in mystical absorption\( *samāveśa* \). 

[^18]: The term used is *aṅkuśa* , which means hook or curb and also oblique. The meaning here is “oblique,” referring to the left, oblique line of the triangle. 

[^19]: There is no satisfactory translation of the term *vaikharī* , which evokes the notion of spreading out \( 

∙ *vi* \) and is generally understood as evoking the 

external, concrete, perceptible dispersion of articulate speech, as opposed to the subtle concentration, and of the preceding stages of the word. In Indian thought, the less concrete, the briefest, the inaudible, is always the better or the best; the manifest, the concrete, the audible, is considered the lowest. 

[^20]: The complex and interesting process of apparition or spreading out of the Word, from *parā* to *vaikharī* , both as a cosmic process and as the process of apparition of speech and consciousness in humans, was described notably in Abhinavagupta’s *Parātrī*ṣ*ikāvivaraṇa* and in the third chapter of his great Tantric work, the *Tantrāloka* . There is no easily readable English translation of the fi rst work and none of the second. The subject was studied and described by A. 

Padoux in* Vāc: The Concept of the Word in Selected Hindu Tantras* \( Albany : SUNY 

Press , 1990; Delhi , 1992 \) . The theory of the levels of *vāc* \(without *parā* \) was 



169

originally put forward by the philosopher-grammarian Bhartṛhari \(5th c. a.d. \) in his treatise “On the Sentence and the Word,” *Vākyapadīya* , a diffi cult work, 

part of which can be read in an English translation. 

[^21]: The term rendered in English by “manifesting” is *bhāsanā* , from the verbal root *BHĀS* , to shine, to be bright, which is used because in such systems as that of Tripurā, the manifestation of the cosmos \(in fact, all manifestation\) is conceived as a shining forth, a luminous manifestation, *ābhāsa* . This is an essential notion of the Pratyabhijñā philosophy, explained at length by Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta. 

[^22]: The *pīṭhas* are seats or places of power sacred to the Goddess. They are usually said to number fifty-one, being the places of the Indian subcontinent where pieces from the dismembered body of Satī, Śiva’s consort, fell as he roamed with it after she died following Dakṣa’s sacrifi ce. Their numbers, however, vary. 

The oldest traditions have only four \(or fi ve\); of those mentioned here, the principal is Oḍḍiyāna, even when, as here, it is not mentioned fi rst. Kāmarūpa’s *tattva* is the earth. It is a yellow square. Geographically, it is Kamākhya, in Assam. Pūrṇagiri’s *tattva* is air. It is gray, shaped as a circle with six *bindus* inside. It is diffi

cult to locate in the Indian subcontinent. Jālandhara’s *tattva* is water. It is white, shaped as a half-moon. It would be in the present region of Jullundur, in the Punjab. Oḍḍiyāna’s is fi re, red, triangular. It is identifi ed with the valley of Swat, now in Pakistan. On the colors attributed to the elements, see T . Goudriaan ,* Māyā Divine and Human* \( Delhi : Motilal Banarsidass , 1978 \) , chap. 4. The *pīṭhās* are here manifestations of the Goddess. They are also places where esoteric doctrines were revealed—hence the use of the word *piṭha* for particular traditions or ritual practices \(e.g., Mantrapīṭha and Vidyāpīṭhā 

to designate two divisions of the Bhairavatantras\). The *pīṭhas* are also considered aspects or forms of energy corresponding to planes of the yogic imaginary body, as is the case here. 

[^23]: Some Śaiva texts say: “The *pīṭha* is Śakti, the *liṅga* is Śiva.” 

[^24]: In many Tantras, notably those of the Trika, the best *liṅga* is said to be the *tūra* , a human skull decorated with incisions. 

[^25]: See the commentary above on *śl.* 40, on the theory of the four levels of the word. 

[^26]: *Spanda* is the primary subtle vibration that animates the eternal dynamism of the supreme deity and pervades and animates the cosmos. *Spanda* is one of the fundamental notions of the Kashmirian nondualist shaivism. It was expounded in the *Spandakārikā* deemed to have been composed by Utpaladeva \(10th c.\). On this important system, see Mark S. G. Dyczkowski ,* The Stanzas* *on Vibration* \( Albany : SUNY Press , 1992 \) . 

[^27]: The repartition of items into a certain number of parts to which is added another part made of the totality of these parts is quite frequent in India, especially the division into 3 \+ 1: three parts plus the whole. This is what we have here. The 

170



ś *rīvidyā* is also sometimes described in this way: its three parts taken separately, then taken as a whole, which is sometimes called *turīyavidyā* , the fourth *vidyā* . 

[^28]: The theory of the *avasthās* \(also called *sthāna* \) goes back to the early Upaniṣads, notably the Maitri, where the fourth is described as *acittaṁ cittamadhyastham* *acintyam* , a thoughtless unthinkable present in thought: it is a condition of pure consciousness \( *caitanyamātravṛtti* \), says the Dī. *Jagrat* is the waking state; *svapna* , which more specifi cally means dream, is the state of sleep, whereas *su*ṣ*upti* is deep, dreamless sleep. The state «“above the fourth” \( *turiyātīta* , a more recent notion\) is described in the Dī as a transcendent state \( *atītarūpam* \) of consciousness of the Self. It is the «“unsurpassed” \( *anuttara* \), the absolute, 

«“light of all lights” \(to quote the Mundaka Upaniṣad II.2,10\), which, though transcendent, is present as their self \( *ātman* \) in all living creatures. 

[^29]: The *Pratyabhijñāhr̥daya* , by Kṣemarāja \(11th c.\), a disciple of Abhinavagupta, is a short philosophical treatise describing the main traits of the Pratyabhijñā 

system. It has been translated into English by Jaideva Singh \(Delhi, 1963\); see introduction, note 16, above. It is not a diffi

cult text and is well worth read-

ing. The Dī on *śl.* 50 is rich and interesting. It is unfortunately too long to be translated here. 

[^30]: The term we translate by triangular is *śṛṅgāṭa* , which is the nut of the water chestnut, the which is triangular in shape. *Śṛṅgāṭa* is often used to mean a triangle or something triangular or threefold. 

[^31]: As mentioned in the introduction above, Kāmeśvarī\(with Kāmeśvara\) can, along with Tripurasundarī\(with Bhairava\), be considered the chief deities of the *dak*ṣ*iṇāmnāya* . The coincidence of two, male and female, fi gures underlines the twofold though nondual nature of the supreme deity. This character is sometimes iconographically shown in images of Kāmaśvara and K āmeśvarīas one bisexual *ardhanari* \(half-female\) fi gure—see, for instance, Ajit Mookerjee ,* Kuṇḍalinī* \( London : Thames & Hudson , 1982 \) , plate X\). 

[^32]: The energies are four when a supreme one, the Peaceful, *śāntā* ,, or Ambikā, the Mother, is added to the basic three. 

[^33]: The expression we translate as “embodied as the *śrīcakra* ” is *śrīcakravapu*ṣ*ā* , 

“having the *śrīcakra* as body”\( *vapu ḥ* \). This last word means form, fi gure, beauty, beautiful appearance, or a form one discovers in meditation, rather than a concrete body. It is therefore sometimes translated as essence, cosmic, beautiful form or presence. The *śrīcakra* is in eff ect viewed as a cosmic embodiment of the Goddess, not as a concrete body or form. 

[^34]: In the nondualist Śaiva systems—the Trika or Pratyabhijñā, especially—the supreme godhead is described as being inseparably light \(conscious light\) and refl ective awareness \( *vimarśa* \), *prakāśa* being masculine, Śiva, and *vimarśa* feminine, Śakti. *Vimarśa* \(a term found in the Dī but not in the YH\) designates the consciousness or awareness one has of what is being perceived or experienced, contributing in this respect to the autonomy and total freedom of 



171

consciousness. This is why the supreme deity is free and active, not unmovable as in the Vedānta; this is one of the points on which Vedānta and Tantra diff er. 

[^35]: The Goddess, says the Dī , transforms herself really into the world, as milk becomes curd. This point is also one of the main diff erences between the Tantric views and those of the Vedānta. 

[^36]: This sort of interpretation, called *nirukta* , goes back to Vedic times. It is sometimes falsely called etymology and then criticized as fanciful, but it is not an etymology. It is an imaginative way to enlarge the semantic fi eld, the aura of meanings, of a word by associating it with other verbal roots, as shown here. 

[^37]: These actions are *avahāna* , inviting the deity to come; *sthāpana* , fi xing it in the icon; *saṁnidhāna* ; and, fi nally, *saṁnirodhāna* , detaining it there. 

[^38]: We write Mudrā when referring to the goddesses so-called and *mudrā* when referring to the notion or to the hand gesture, it being understood that they are perceived by the YH and the Dī as being simultaneously both deity and gesture. 

[^39]: *K*ṣ*obha* —which may be translated as eff ervescence—is, among Trika authors such as Abhinavagupta, the state of consciousness in which the cosmic manifestation appears, perturbing by its diversity the original quiescence of the Absolute. This role of *k*ṣ*obha* is also found in other traditions, such as the *Vi*ṣ*ṇupurāṇa* , I.2.29–31. 

[^40]: Such doors here are symbolical, since one does not enter a *śrīcakra* . But when a *cakra* or yantra drawn on the ground is large, as is the case in various rituals, the offi

ciant can actually enter or leave it using these doors. 

[^41]: In the third chapter \( *śl* . 127\), these *kalā* s or “vowels” are called *vāyu* , or winds, that is, vital forces, *prāṇas* . 

[^42]: See chapter 3, *śl* . 126–128. 

[^43]: On *k*ṣ*obha* , see note 39, above. 

[^44]: The number of *cakras* varies according to traditions. In the Tripurā tradition, they number nine, corresponding to the nine divisions of the *śrīcakra.* There are also secondary centers \( *adhāra* , *śūnya* , *vyoman* , *bindu* , etc.\), the number and places of which in the imaginal yogic body vary also according to traditions. 

[^45]: On the *āyudhas* of deities, see chapter 3, commentary on *śl* . 159, and n. 15. 

[^46]: *Khe* is the locative form of *kha* : “in *kha.* ” 

[^47]: *Bhūtraya:* not because there are three earths but because the outer part of the *cakra* , called *bhūgṛha* , “house of the earth,” is encircled by three lines. 
