+++
title = "2"

+++

[^1]: This, we may note, is a case in which mantra and deity are indistinguishable. 

[^2]: A *vyāpakanyāsa* , a diff usive or spreading placing of a mantra on the body, is normally made with the two hands over the whole body or on a whole part of it, the power thus placed being deemed to pervade the whole region thus submitted to the power of the mantra. In the present case, the *mūlavidyā* would 

172



pervade the whole body of the adept with the power of the Goddess. Although it is mantric, this practice is therefore entirely mental. For the performer, however, it is a total—both mental and bodily—experience. 

[^3]: These nine centers of the yogic body with their presiding deities are enumerated in *śl* . 25–27a of chapter 1; see above. 



[^4]: On the term *uddhāra* , “extraction” of the letters of a mantra, see above, note 11. 

[^5]: *Saṁghaṭṭa* means coming together and also rubbing, interacting. It therefore has a sexual connotation, hence its use to denote the union of Śiva and Śakti. 



[^6]: “Indra, thanks to his magical powers \[ *māyābhi ḥ* \], takes on diverse forms”\(ṛgveda, VI.47.18\). See also the *Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad* II.5.19. 



[^7]: On the planes of the Word \( *vāc* \), from *parā* to *vaikharī* , see our commentary above on chapter 1, *śl* . 36–40. 

[^8]: Amṛtānanda says, in fact, “the fourth mantra,” the totality of the *śrividyā* being taken as a fourth element made up of the three *kūṭas* : 3 \+ 1 = 4. 

[^9]: *Visarga* means emission. In the phonematic emanation system of the nondualist Śaiva traditions, *visarga* , as the last “vowel,” preceding the consonants in the traditional order of the Sanskrit alphabet, is deemed to “emit” them. 

[^10]: Sun, Moon, and Fire \(Sūrya, Soma, and Agni\) are the three astral luminaries \( *dhāman* , *dhamatraya* \) of the Śaiva traditions. They are usually conceived as three concentric discs visualized on top of one another. Their symbolic meanings or correspondences are often mentioned. They are homologized with various powers: the three *guṇas,* yogic *nā ḍīs* , etc. *Dhāman* , a locus of light or glory, is the place where a deity or power is present, manifesting itself luminously. 

The indologist Jan Gonda defi ned it as “a holder or container of numinous potency.” 

[^11]: On the theory and symbolic meaning of the *kāmakalā* , the reader is referred to Puṇyānandanātha’s *Kāmakalāvilāsa* , edited, translated, and with commentary by Arthur Avalon, a study fi rst published in 1922. This diagram was especially studied by David G . White in* Kiss of the Yoginī: “Tantric Sex” in Its South Asian* *Contexts* \( Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 2003 \) . 

[^12]: *Bhāva* has, in fact, many meanings: it may mean natural, simple, but also con-jectural or meditative, etc. Since it is to be attained by meditating intensely \( *bhāvayan* \), “a meaning attained by meditation” could perhaps be a likely rendering of the term. 

[^13]: See Arthur Avalon’s edition and English translation of this work, published in the Tantrik Texts series \(Madras: Ganesh & Co., 1953 \). 

[^14]: The YH takes over the notion, expounded notably by Abhinavagupta, that there is a thirty-seventh *tattva* , called *paraśiva* , which is “emptier than empty” \( *śunyātiśūnya* \) and represents Śiva as identical with and inseparable from the universe. Still higher, there is, for Abhinavagupta, a thirty-eighth *tattva* , which is unlimited and is taught mainly for meditation \(see *Tantrāloka* beginning at 11.22\). 



173

[^15]: On the intense identifying form of meditation called *bhāvanā* , see note 27 of the Introduction, above. 

[^16]: The cosmology of the YH is, as in all Tantric texts, that of the Sāṁkhya, for which the constituting elements of the cosmos are the twenty-fi ve *tattvas* , “realities,” 

going from *puruṣa* , the Lord, to the earth \( *pṛthivī* \), to which are added, above *puruṣa* , from fi ve to eleven other *tattvas* corresponding to higher planes of the godhead. The subtle elements \( *tanmātra* \) are, in descending order, sound, contact, form, taste, and smell; the gross ones \( *bhūta* \) are ether, air, fi re, water, and earth. 

[^17]: *Pralayākalā* is to be understood as “without *kalā* , etc., thanks to the *prayala* ”; they are subjects, that is, who will survive the next *pralaya* \(the end of the cosmos\) because they have not burned away all their karma. The *vijṇānakalas* are “without *kalā* \[and other fetters\] thanks to their discriminative knowledge.” The *sakalā* , 

“associated with \[the *tattva* \] *kalā* ,” which is the lowest of the *kañcukas* \(the cuirasses which imprison the soul\), are submitted to all possible fetters and limitation. The YH and its commentary mention here three *pramātṛ* only, although there is, in all Śaiva systems, a hierarchy of seven *pramātṛ* \(the term is variously translated as subject, conscious or experiencing subject, or experiencer, no translation being very satisfactory\) going from Śiva, the highest, to the *sakala* , The three quoted here are the three lowest ones. The other, higher ones are, after Śiva, the *Mantramahe*ś*varas* , Great Lords of the Mantras, the *Mantre*ś*varas* , Lords of Mantras, and the *Mantras* . 

[^18]: *Nigarbha* : Bhāskararāya, in his commentary \( *Setubandha* , p. 155\), explains this rather unusual term, saying that *nigarbha* is as if entirely in a womb \( *nitaraṁ *

*garbhe* \), thus completely secret \( *rahasyottama* \). Jayaratha, in another text, says that it is an inner \( *āntaratayā* \) experience of the pure Self \(even if it is diff erentiated into master, disciple, etc.\). 

[^19]: The moon has fi fteen “sections” \( *kalā* \) or digits \( *tithi* \) for its half-month but sixteen if one counts the *āmāvasya* , the night of the new moon; see note 26 below. 

[^20]: The term *gaṇeṣatva* is to be taken as “the state of mistress \[ *ī śatva* \] of the troup 

\[ *gaṇa* \]” of deities, not as “having the nature of Gaṇeśas.” These deities are to be placed by *nyāsa* on the body of the offi

ciant of the *pūjā* which we will see in 

chapter 3, *śl* .14–21. 

[^21]: See note 9, above. 

[^22]: The nine *grahas* are: Sun, Moon, Venus, Mercury, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, to which are added Rāhu and Ketu, heavenly bodies that are favorable or dangerous. The Grahas, “Seizers,” are also a category of demons that “seize” human beings, especially women and children. Their worship, the *grahapūjā* , aims at pacifying them, stopping their dangerous action. 

[^23]: The *nakṣatras* are the lunar mansions, the constellations through which the moon passes. They are both divisions of the ecliptic and goddesses. Like the Grahas, they have infl uences, either bad or good, on humans. 

[^24]: These are the sixteen vowels; the fi ve groups of consonants; the four semivowels *YA* , *RA* , *LA* , and *VA* ; the sibilants *ŚA* , *Ṣ A* , *SA* \); and *Ḥ A.* 

174



[^25]: The theory of the levels of the Word was fi rst propounded by the grammarian-philosopher Bhartṛhari \(5th c.\), for whom there were only three levels. Later on, Tantric authors, notably Abhinavagupta, added a fourth \(or, rather, a fi rst\) transcendent, supreme, *parā* level, considered the basis of the three others, those through which the word fi rst appears in consciousness, then becomes subtly formulated, then is fully manifested as speech, these three stages being also the stages of the manifestation of the cosmos. On the subject, see A . Padoux ,* Vāc: The Concept of the Word in Selected Hindu Tantras* \( Albany : SUNY Press , 1990 ; Delhi, 1992\), pp. 166–222. 

[^26]: The lunar month has thirty days, called *tithi* . It is also considered to be divided \(for the half-month\) into sixteen *kalās* , the fi fteen days, plus the so-called *amākalā* , which is the *amāvasya* , the night of the new moon during which sun and moon are supposed to be together; this *kalā* is deemed invisible and immortal. The division of the supreme reality into sixteen goes back to ancient, even to Vedic, times; see the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad, I.5, 14–15, on the division of Prajāpâti into sixteen parts. 

[^27]: As we have seen in the fi rst chapter \(1.25\), there are in this system two lotuses with a thousand petals, one at the base, the other at the summit of the course of the *kuṇḍalinī.* 

[^28]: Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.8, 7. 

[^29]: The term *pratīti* is often used in the Dī in the sense of an intuitive nondiscursive comprehension of the reality. It is defi ned notably as *pramātṛviśrānti* , that is, repose, meditative contemplation, spiritual absorption in the supremely conscious. The Goddess is here defi ned as such insofar as she must be understood by the adept in this way, in her cosmic glory, through a mystical experience. 

[^30]: On the *kalās* of *HRĪṂ* , see chapter 1, the commentary on stanzas 25–35, above. 

[^31]: *Mahāprayojanam* , that is to say, a very high use, a very prominent goal: the realization of the highest meaning, liberation, the union with Śiva. See also the commentary on stanza 5, Chapter 1, above. 

[^32]: On the Ḍ ākinīs and the bodily elements, see the commentary on stanzas 60 

and 61, above. 
