+++
title = "3"

+++



[^1]: We have already seen *nyāsas* in chapters 1 and 2. It consists of the ritual placing \(or imposition\) of mantras on the body or on some support. It is done by uttering \(and/or evoking mentally\) a mantra while placing it where needed with a particular hand gesture, a *mudrā* . The eff ect of the placing is sometimes conceived of as extending pervasively on a whole part of the body; this is called a *vyāpakanyāsa* \(usually done with both hands; see chapter 2, note 2\). Such is the case here for the lines of the square that form the outer limit of the *śrīcakra.* For a thorough overview of the subject of *nyāsa* as expounded in Sanskrit texts, see A . Padoux ,* Tantric Mantras* \( London and New York : Routledge , 2011 \) , pp. 54–80. 



175

[^2]: The division of a category of subjects or objects into three groups—highest, middling, inferior \( *uttama* , *madhyama* , *adama* \) or supreme, supreme-nonsupreme, nonsupreme \( 

*para* , *parāpara* , *apara*\)—is usual in Indian philosophy and 

metaphysics. 



[^3]: The term *sādhaka* is seldom used in the YH, but only an adept who has received the *sādhaka* \(or *nirvāṇa* \) *dīkṣā* \(initiation\) has the formal capacity \( *adhikāra* \) to perform the ritual. The adept, here as in the preceding chapters, is therefore a *sādhaka.* 



[^4]: The planets \(called *graha* \) include, in addition to fourteen heavenly bodies, Sun, Moon, etc., Rahu and Ketu, which are two lunar nodes. *Grahas* , as their name shows \(it means “seizer”\), are powers that can magically “seize,” that is, infl uence, human beings. Diff erent sorts of demons or evil supernatural beings are also called *graha* . 



[^5]: The twenty-seven *nakṣatras* were already mentioned in chapter 2, *śl* . 58b–60a. 



[^6]: When considered as numbering seven, this group of Yoginīs includes Yākinī. 



[^7]: The episode is described in several Purāṇas. 



[^8]: The *pīṭhanyāsa* would thus be performed uttering a mantra such as “ *AI Ṃ *

*HRĪṂ ŚRīṂ A Ṃ Kāmarūpāya nama ḥ* ” on the head, for the fi rst *pīṭha* and the phoneme *A* . 



[^9]: The *siddhis* , supernatural powers, are also minor goddesses, Yoginīs. We therefore sometimes refer to them as Siddhis. Their number is not the same in all texts. Their list, however, usually begins with *aṇimā* , the power to be as small as an atom \( *aṇu* \). The usual number of *siddhis* is eight. They are *aṇimā* , *laghimā* \(to become light\), *garimā* \(to become heavy\), *mahimā*\(greatness\), *prāpti* \(to obtain what one wishes\), *prakāmya* \(to be irresistible\), *ī śitva* or *ī śitā* \(domination\), and *vaśitva* \(to subjugate\). To this canonical list is sometimes added *śānti* \(pacifi cation\) or even other ones, The Dī lists ten *siddhis* . See *śl.* 115. 

[^10]: This translates *vyāpakatvena* as “pervasively.” 

[^11]: The term *vyoman* designates the inner “space” of the mystical heart \(also called *kha* , a term that refers to the central void of the axle of a wheel and, by extension, the void of the heart\). It is therefore also the highest level of consciousness. There are sometimes several *vyomans* that are centers of the yogic body. 

See above, chapter 1, the commentary on *śl* . 62. 

[^12]: The Dī gives the names of these fourteen energies and the names of the series of twice ten \(Sarvasiddhipradā, Sarvajñā, . . . \) ones. We will meet them again later, starting at *śl* . 115. 

[^13]: The term used to mean southeast is *agni* , fi re, because Agni, the god of the sacrifi cial fi re, presides over this direction of space. 

[^14]: On the yogic imaginal body, see the introduction, above. 

[^15]: The so-called weapons \( *āyudha* \) are the objects that the deities hold in their hands. They are not always arms but diff erent tools or symbols. Tripurasundarī

\(or Kāmeśvara/Kāmeśvarī\) holds the elephant goad \( *āṅkuśa* \), the noose \( *pāśa* \), 

176



a bow \( *dhanuś* \), and arrows \( *bāṇa* \). *Āyudhas* are also deities and are then shown in human form, each carrying one of the weapons. They are then part of the deity’s retinue \( *āvaraṇadevatā* \). 

[^16]: These deities are often shown in “half-woman” \( *ardhanarī* \) form, both male and female, the male aspect forming the right half of the image, the female the left half. 

[^17]: Her mantra, the *śrīvidyā* , is similarly the *mūlamantra* of this tradition. 

[^18]: The *āvaraṇadevatā* , “surrounding deities,” are those forming the retinue of a main deity. They are usually disposed around her or him in concentric circles—a “mandalic” pattern, as one often says. 

[^19]: The number and the names of the Mātṛkās vary according to traditions and texts, the fi rst being often Brahm 

ī /Brahmanī. They are enumerated and 

described in *śl.* 116–123 for their worship. 

[^20]: The Dī explains: “that is to say, on the forehead.” 

[^21]: On the absolute as inseparably Light and Act of Consciousness, \( *prakāśavimarśamaya* \), see the Introduction. 

[^22]: A *bali* is a ritual off ering to a deity, notably, in a Śaiva context, to Yoginī, or to Baṭuka, and Kṣetrapāla, both often seen as forms of Bhairava. It may consist of food, various beverages, or ingredients. It sometimes includes an animal sacrifi ce. 

[^23]: The term “ray” \( *marīci* \), or “ray of consciousness” \( *cinmarīci* \), is used for the Yoginīs and also for the sense organs, which underlines the luminous and conscious character of these deities with which the sense organs are sometimes identifi ed. 

[^24]: *AU* is the central part of *SAU Ḥ* , the *bījamantra* of Parā, the supreme goddess of the Trika. 

[^25]: The secret place \( *guhya* \) is “the place between the anus and the male organ”\(the perineum\), says the Dī. By face \( *mukha* \), one is to understand the forehead. 

[^26]: The six *aṅgas* are, in fact, not the limbs \(which is the usual meaning of *aṅga* \) of a deity but attributes, perfections, or powers of a deity. They number six: *hr̥daya* \(heart\), *śiras* \(head\), *śikhā* \(tuft\), *kavaca* or *varman* \(cuirass\), *astra* \(weapon\), and *netra* \(eye\). They play a role in ritual, being imposed \( *nyāsa* \) by their mantras. 

[^27]: *Arghya* usually consists of water specially prepared, mixed with various substances, and accompanied by a mantra. One traditionally distinguishes between ordinary or common *arghya* \( *sāmānārghya* \) and special *arghya* \( *viśeṣārghya* \). 

The latter is used for particular deities or specifi c rites. In Tantric rites, *arghya* may include blood, diff erent bodily fl uids or excretions, or other “transgressive” elements. *Arghya* is one of the ritual “services” \( *upacāra* \) presented to a deity during worship. Here the *arghya* prescribed is the common one. 

[^28]: We have not found any information on these deities. 

[^29]: The composite phoneme *KṣA* is, as we have seen, often added to the forty-nine letters \(ending with the aspirate *HA* \) in order to have fifty letters. The so-called Vedic *Ḷ* is sometimes also added in order to have fifty-one letters. 



177

[^30]: The sequences of Sanskrit letters given here are not arbitrary; they follow the traditional grammatical order \(the *varṇasamāmnāya* \) of the Sanskrit alphabet. 

[^31]: The term *madya* may refer to diff erent alcoholic beverages, but when several dif-ferent terms are used, *madya* tends to designate wine \(made with grape juice\). 

[^32]: *Vauṣaṭ* is one of the exclamations, the *jātis* , added at the end of a mantra to adapt it to diff erent uses. *Jātis* are of Vedic origin. They are six in number: *nama ḥ* , *svāhā* , *vauṣaṭ* , *hūṁ* , *vaṣaṭ* , and *phaṭ* . 

[^33]: See YH 1.34. 

[^34]: In the Pratyabhijṇā system, the *ahantā* is the I-ness, the conscious perceiving subject, the state of being “I,” as opposed to all that constitutes the objectivity, the objective world, the “this-ness” \( *idantā* \). 

[^35]: This rather obscure list of elements includes all the “realities” \( *tattva* \), or principles, constituting the cosmic manifestation. Each of them is considered here as corresponding to a section of the *śrīcakra:* the fourfold inner organ corresponds to the central triangle; *avyakta* , *ahaṁkāra* , and the fi ve *tanmātra* to the eight-triangle *cakra* ; and so forth, down to the sixteen “evolutes” \( *buddhi* , *ahaṁkāra* , the senses, and the elements\) corresponding to the sixteen-petaled lotus. 

[^36]: We write “sacrifi ce” because the Sanskrit verb used here \(for metrical reasons\) is *yajet* . It refers, however, to the usual Tantric *pūjā* . 

[^37]: Many diff erent terms are used for ritual alcoholic beverages, the most usual being *hetu* and *kāraṇa* , which both mean “cause.” 

[^38]: There are sixteen when one adds to the fi fteen lunar days the *amāvasya* , the night when sun and moon are deemed to coincide and which is invisible. 

These days are also called *kalas* , “portions.” As for the *śrīvidyā* , it numbers sixteen syllables when the *vidyā* as a whole is added to its fi fteen constitutive letters. Sixteen is a lunar number. It is also the number of divisions of Prajāpati or of the Puruṣa, since the Veda. 

[^39]: A general rule in Tantric worship is that the aspect of the deity to be worshipped \(usually to be visualized\) is to be adapted to the aim of the ritual: a fearful form, for a “cruel” \( *krura* \) rite, a peaceful one for an appeasing one, and so forth, the shape, clothes, ornaments, color, etc., of the deity being diff erent in each case. 

[^40]: The term *matuluṅga* 

is variously translated as “wild lemon” or \(in the 

Monier-Williams Sanskrit-English dictionary\) as “horn-apple.” 

[^41]: In the traditional Sanskrit grammar, the “vowels” \( *svara* \) are considered male and active, as seeds \( *bīja* \), whereas the consonants \( *vyañjana* \) are deemed to be feminine and inactive by themselves; they are *yonis* \(wombs\). In the traditional Indian view, the role of the womb is passive, as a mere receptacle of the male seed. \(We put “vowels” in quotes because the sixteen *svaras* include two diphthongs and two accessory signs— *bindu* and *anusvara* —which are not grammatically vowels.\) 

178



[^42]: See our commentary on chapter 1, *śl* . 42, above. 

[^43]: A lunar month is made up of thirty lunar days; half of it \(waxing or decreasing\) lasts fi fteen lunar days, to which is traditionally added the *āmavasya* , the day of the new moon, which makes sixteen. 

[^44]: *Bhūtalipi* 

is often translated as “demon-writing” \(in the Monier-Williams 

Sanskrit-English dictionary, for instance\). But this is a misnomer, its diff erent groups of phonemes being associated with the gross elements \( *bhūta* \) of the cosmos, an association mentioned in the Dī. The *bhūtalipi* is made up of forty-two letters only, from *A* to *SA* , ventilated into nine groups \( *varga* \) of vowels, diphthongs, and semivowels, then of consonants ending with the sibilants, the last of which is *SA* . In spite of its being called a writing, *lipi* , its uses seem more oral and metaphysical than concrete; here we are on the plane of *madhyamā* , a subtle, nonmanifested level of the Word \( *vāc* \). 

[^45]: The names of the diff erent categories of Yoginīs of the Tripurā tradition are given above in the explanation of *śl* . 90 of this chapter. 

[^46]: On *bhāvanā* , see chapter 2, note 12 above. 

[^47]: This conception of *kula* will be seen again with stanza 168. 

[^48]: See chapter 1, *śl* . 41–43, and chapter 1, note 22. 

[^49]: On the fi ve conditions or states \( *avasthā* \) of the mind, from waking \( *jāgrat* \) to *turyātīta* , see chapter 1, *śl.* 49, above. 

[^50]: The Nityās as quoted in the YH number sixteen \(see *śl.* 112b–113a\). They include Nityā, Kāmeśvarī, and Bhagamālinī, mentioned here fi rst, followed by the thirteen others. 

[^51]: *RA* is traditionally the *bīja* of fi re \( *agnibīja* \), *LA* is that of water, etc 52 . On the notions of *pramātṛ* , *prameya* , and *pramāna* , see chapter 1, *śl* . 13, above. 

[^53]: *Māyā* often designates *HRĪṂ* . The *Ī* here is the *Ī* of the *śaktikūṭa.* 

[^54]: Other Tantric Śaiva texts give diff erent defi nitions of *turya* . 

[^55]: *Smaraṇa* \(or *smṛti* \) has an important role in nondualist shaivism, for, in joining the past to the present, it abolishes time. \(An analogous role is given to memory by Marcel Proust in *Time Regained* .\) 

[^56]: In Śaiva philosophy, remembrance or memory \( *smṛti* , *snaraṇa* \) is an important state of consciousness, since in remembrance, consciousness, turning back upon itself and desisting from the perception of new objects, recalls those previously perceived and rests within itself in a subtle state. Also, connecting time past with time present, memory transcends time and thus opens the way to the Absolute. 

[^57]: We have translated *mantrātmā* in this way, but *ātmā* does not, in fact, add anything to *ṇada* . *Rūpa* at the end of a word often does not convey any special meaning. 

[^58]: This refers to the curved shape of the letter *Ī* in *devanāgari* script. 

[^59]: In the commentary to YH 1.29–30. 



179

[^60]: The so-called *pañcamakāra* is a modern notion. Older texts mention as Tantric off erings only wine, meat, and sex \( *madya* , *māṁsa* , *mithuna* \), a triad, inciden-tally, already mentioned in Manu’s Laws as involving no fault \( *na doṣa ḥ* \). 

[^61]: *Naimittika* rites are obligatory; they must be performed, but not every day, only on particular occasions or at particular times of the year, such as the *parvans* , or in special cases, such as initiation \( *dīkṣā* \), rites of installation \( *pratiṣṭha* \) etc., and, of course, on the occasions mentioned here. 

[^62]: The traditional triad of knower, known, and knowledge, which is taken to refer to the totality of the world. 

[^63]: In Tantric texts, the category of *mumukṣu* includes women and children. 

