+++
title = "01 Puṇya and Pāpa"

+++
A background for the introduction to Puṇya and Pāpa.

“What do puṇya and pāpa mean? Generally no one ponders about that. The words—*‘Puṇya* is accrued”, “*Pāpa* has perished”—uttered by people casually, sometime sound as though they have better knowledge than those who have understood them clearly. But, are they visible to the naked eyes like the coming and going of, say a cow or a calf? Then what are they? A solid? Liquid? Gas? What is their form? Where are they located? How long do they exist? They are not meant for animals right? If they are applicable only to human beings, where do they remain and how long? Don’t they get reduced to ashes along with the person who has earned them, after he dies? Such questions naturally arise. They can be comprehended only when they are seen through the discriminating eyes of jnānis. Merit and sin are a kind of distinctive marks \(impressions\) recorded on the gramophone plate of the mind. They are also called *Samskāras* and *Vāsanās*. The impressions causing happiness are called *Puṇya* and the ones that cause misery are called *Pāpa*. Both these are marks imprinted on the mind. It is almost impossible to erase these inner impressions. They do not perish even when the soul leaves the body. As evident from the words “मनष्षष्ठानीन्द्रियाणि प्रकृतिस्थानि कर्षति”, the mind also goes with him. All the old records of impressions will be present in the mind. They stay with the person as long as the relationship between the *jīva* and the mind exists. These marks do not touch the person who crosses the wheel of mind itself and flies to the place of Brahman. In all other persons, the impressions of *puṇya* bring happiness and the impressions of pāpa bring misery, and this phenomenon exists for ever. Deeds performed to imprint the marks of merit lead to happiness, and the ones contrary to that, lead to misery.”

By minding this principle as explained below, one can easily understand how a holy bath can absolve sins and cause *puṇya*.

1. A religious bath taken in the holy waters wash out all the dirt and inertia of the body. Tranquility is felt in the mind. Turbidity caused by the sinful impressions get removed. Mind becomes clear. Some marks of misery get erased and comfort sets in. Such comfort-causing marks are indeed *puṇya*. The crooked marks which get erased are *pāpa*. This should be understood clearly. 
2. Some *tīrthas* have the capacity to cure both bodily and mental ailments, as they \(the *tīrthas*\) come into contact with medicinal herbs and holy ground surfaces \(while they flow\). One who takes a bath in them is benefitted with the cure of bodily and mental ailments. 
3. Even by pondering about the meaning of names given to the holy waters by the *maharshis* such as *‘Pāpanaśini’*, *mānasasarovara*, *Bindu-sarovara*, *Nārada kuṇḍa* and *Gaurīkuṇḍa*, bad impressions vanish and good impressions get recorded in the mind. 
4. While taking a bath in the holy waters, if one remembers the virtues of *Jnānis* and their auspicious deeds with the feeling-“This is the water which the *jnānis* have used for bath. As said in ‘सन्मनुष्यमनो यथा’, their minds are pellucid. They are free from the dirt of the *guṇas viz., rajas* and *tamas*. They dwell in a *Śuddhātma* who is free from *vikāras.*” And, by remembering their holy deeds, bad *samskāras* vanish and good *samskāras* arise. 
5. Also, chanting of holy *mantras* while bathing helps in routing bad impressions, and good impressions get imprinted on the mind. 
6. If auspicious feelings are mixed in the waters \(to be used for bathing\) after a good *Saṅkalpa*, then the bath becomes not just a dip in the water in the physical sense, but a dip in the holy *atma tīrtha*. “आत्मैव सर्वतीर्थानि” “मन्मनो मीनवन्नित्यं क्रीडत्यानन्दवारिधौ” \(My mind always enjoys in the ocean of bliss like a fish”\) Such sacred feelings are hidden in the above words. 
7. During a dip in the waters, breathing gets stopped \(for a while\). It creates the natural *kumbhaka state* for the *Adhikāris* with a good mindset, and makes their mind immersed in *śubhālambana* \(auspicious support\). The supreme bliss produced from that becomes not just a dip in the water in the physical sense, but a dip that clears all bad impressions undoubtedly. 
8. With the sacred contact of the lotus feet of the *jnānis*, the *tīrthas* are rendered even more great and powerful, to remove sins. “तीर्थीकुर्वन्ति तीर्थानि तीर्थभूता हि साधवः” \(*Jnānis* make the *tīrthas* holier. They themselves are *tīrthas,* says *Bhagavān Vyāsa*\). A narrative, popular in the society of saints may be remembered here. A *sādhaka* who was standing near a hermitage of a *Brahmarshi* happened to see some women in dreadful form entering the hermitage. After sometime, he saw some women divinely beautiful women coming out of the *Āśrama*. Stopping them he asked who they are. They said, “We are *Gaṅgā* and other rivers deities. People taking bath in our waters become pure dropping all their sins on us. We became ugly like female demons on taking their sins. But on entering the hermitage of the *Brahmarshi* and staying there with devotion for a while in their presence, we got back our natural divine form.” Then the *sādhaka* asked them—“Then did the *Brahmarshi* get a dreadful from by taking your sins?” “No” they said. “The sins do not touch them at all. They were reduced to ashes by the very sight of *Brahmarshis*.” The *jnānis* untouched by either *puṇya* or *pāpa*, purify them \(the waters\) and make them *tīrthas*, and therefore, those who take bath in the *tīrthas* shed their sins and become pure. 
9. On some occasions, the *brahmajnānis* who visit the *tīrthas*, happen to touch the waters with their divine minds, sights and bodies, and pass into them a divine energy stream with the wish “Let these *tīrthas* acquire the power of ridding bad *samskāras* of people who bathe, for a specific span of time. Let them obtain the capacity to fill good *samskāras* in such people. Let them acquire the capacity to carry them \(the devotees\) to the *Brāhmi* state which is free from *puṇyas* and *papas.*” Those who take bath in such sacred *tīrthas* which are filled with the divine willpower, reap the above said benefits accordingly. 
