+++
title = "04 Modern views"

+++
Views on the quality \(properties\) of Gaṅgā by people belonging to other religions, and experiments by modern physicians and their opinions.

History tells us that the healthy qualities of the waters of *Gaṅgā* have attracted not just the Hindus, but the followers of other religions also who were cognizant of its use and were dxiligently consuming it. A travelogue writer by name Iben Batuta tells that Mohammed Bin Tughlak used to get *Gaṅgā* water from Doulathabād regularly. And it would take forty days to reach him. \(Gibb’s Translation, P. 183\)

A book pertaining to Akbar by name Ayine Akbari tells that Akbar considered *Gaṅgatīrtha* on par with nectar. He was drinking it both at home and during travel. He had appointed trusted officers to get him sealed *Gaṅgātīrtha*. Though water from river *Yamunā* or rainwater was used for cooking purposes, a small quantity of water from *Gaṅgā* was being added to that. Not just Akbar, even the bigot Aurangazeb used to love *Gaṅgātīrtha*. A French physician of those times by name Vernier tells us-“*Gaṅgātīrtha* is being kept along with other food stuff and drinks of the king in Delhi and Agra. It would be there even in his travels. Camels used to carry it.” “Even Muslim Nawabs stupefied by its healthy properties, were consuming it.”—statements like this can also be seen \(Narrative P. 248\). Gulām Hussain in his book on the history of Bengal writes “No water can be equal to the water of the *Gaṅgā* in sweetness, taste and the quality of lightness. It does not deteriorate even after a long time.” Taivernier says “It would cost two to three thousand rupees to get *Gaṅgātīrtha* from a long distance and to distribute during marriages.” We come across a statement which says that after the Bhūtān War, the Tūshilāmas of Tibet bought land on the shores of *Gaṅgā* and built a monastery there. Modern physicians and scholars have conclusively stated after conducting experiments that the water of *Gaṅgā* is curative of ailments and a sure cure for skin diseases and infectious diseases, and it does not get stale like the water of other rivers. One Dr. Nelson has said “*Gaṅgātīrtha* taken from Calcutta and carried to London by ship would be thoroughly pure. But water from Thames would turn stale before it could reach Bombay. When I landed in Agra, I came to know of the astonishing fact that the water of *Gaṅgā* had the property of destroying bacteria.” After conducting research on *Gaṅgātīrtha* Dr. Han Cran declared—“We drew water from the *Gaṅgā* at *Kāsi* from a spot where a lot of dirt was getting collected. It contained cholera spreading germs in lakhs. When we examined the water after six hours, we found that all the cholera germs had died. The same was the result in the water collected at a spot where a dead body was floating. When the cholera causing germs were let into pure water, they found that they had multiplied in large numbers. And when placed in *Gaṅgātīrtha* they became dead within six hours. Therefore we began to use the *Gaṅgātīrtha* now and then for curing diseases.” *Pandit Ṭhakūrdatta Sharma*, a researcher of the periodical *“Amṛtadhāra”* says that experiments have confirmed that *Gaṅgātīrtha* kills cholera germs. One *Kaviraj Pratāp Simha* has cured a number of cholera patients in his clinic treating them with the water of *Gaṅgā*. To the question why cholera does not figure in the list of diseases in Bhutan, he says”—They drink only the water of *Gaṅgā*. They bathe the cholera afflicted patient in the *Gaṅgā* and cool him down. They make him drink *Gaṅgātīrtha* frequently and cure him of the diseases the doctors there say. “Water of the *Gaṅgotri* cures diabetes” “By using *Gaṅgātīrtha* in injections, many diseases have been cured.” the doctors say.
