+++
title = "11 Some problems"

+++
Some problems posed by the stories relating to *Gaṅgā*:

The *Gaṅgā* is a river which takes its birth at the top of the *Himālayas*. Let us believe that its water has the power to cure a number of ailments. But *Itihāsas, purāṇas* and *āgamas* pronounce strange statements about the river. “It is the holy water which was in the *Kamanḍalu* of *Brahma Deva.* When he \(i.e. *Brahma*\) the Lord of *Satyaloka*, washed the lotus feet of *Trivikrama Nārāyaṇa*, *Gaṅgā* took birth \(there\). There-after, she ascended the head of *Śiva* the most auspicious, and later, due to the efforts of the great ascetic *Bhagīratha*, she was made to descend to the earth and the nether worlds. She also happened to flow out of the ears of the sage *Jāhnu*. The gods took her, who was a sibling of *Umā,* to heavens for their work.” We come across such statements about her origin \(*Rāmāyaṇa* 1-53 to 65-*Śrīmadbhāgavata* 8-21\).

Many questions arise here about these stories. Are they not imaginary stories? There is no unanimity also in them. Is it true that *Gaṅgā* descended from heaven to the earth? Or Is it true that it was taken from the earth to the heaven? On the contrary, if *Gaṅgā* is a river of divine knowledge, should she not always stay in the head of lord *Śiva* a *jnāni*? Did it become empty in its origin, when it descended to earth? We hear that *Gaṅgā* became arrogant, imagining that she would even wash *Śiva* away by Jumping down on his head. Then *Śiva* arrested her in his matted hair and made her roam about there only. If so, can there be arrogance even in the power of God?

One more question invades us-*Gaṅgā* is the holy water of Lord *Vishṇu’s* feet. The statement that *Siva* bore it on his head, could be only a part of a story composed by devotee poets, to show the difference between *Śiva* and *Vishṇu*.

It has to be noted here that the solution for the questions pertaining to topics related to the visualization of *Gaṅgā* within, should be searched only in the *jnānabhūmi* and not in the sphere of intellectual gymnastic. A brief answer will be provided hereby, in the background of the upadeśa of our Gurudeva who has travelled in all the relevant spheres.

### Brief Answers

*Śāstras* state that *Gaṅgā* is associated with the Trinity-famously known as *Brahma, Vishṇu* and *Maheshvara*.The philosophical meaning of this is that all these three gods are forms of *jnāna*, and they also bestow *jnāna*. *Gaṅgā* is the nectar of the divine knowledge filled in the vessel of the will of creation of Lord *Brahma* who is thoroughly proficient in the *Vedas*. She is the nectar of the divine knowledge dwelling in the head of Lord *Śiva*, which is the abode of *jnāna* of *Sadāśiva* who is the annihilator, super universal, and the embodiment of divine knowledge. She is the ambrosia of the nectar of the upward going lotus foot of *Urukrama*-*Trivikrama* praised by *Purushasūkta* as “पादोऽस्य विश्वा भूतानि, त्रिपादस्यामृतं दिवि” As all these three are \(different\) modes of the almighty, taking refuge in any one of these results indeed in the obtaining of *jnānāmṛta.*

The *Vaishṇava purāṅas* say that *Śiva* came to be known in the true sense of the word, on bearing *Gaṅgā* in his head, who was in the feet of *Vishṇu*. “पादोदकेन स शिवः स्वशिरोधृतेन” The purport of this is to state *Vishṇu’s* supremacy. Similarly *Śaiva Purāṇas* say that *Vishṇu* engaged himself in searching for the feet of *Śiva*. This is to state the supremacy of *Śiva*. But actually speaking, the *tattva* of the statement that *Gaṅgā* belongs to *Vishṇu’s* feet and the head of *Śiva*, should be understood in the *Yogamārga* only. The place of *Nārāyaṇa* is *Sahasrāra*. The place of *Rudradeva* is the midpoint of the eyebrows. This entire region is the abode of *jnānatīrtha* which is the redeemer. This can also be termed as, “The origin of *jnānaGaṅgā* is the feet of *Nārāyaṇa* and the head of *Śiva* is its expanse.” This is the principle here.

The feet i.e. the tread ofLord *Nārāyaṇa* who is known as *Tripadvibhūti* fills the three worlds viz *bhū*, *bhuvas* and *suvar* and crossing even them, covers the upper \(regions\). When the foot \(of *Nārāyaṇa*\) comes to the abode namely *Vyāhrti* it is natural that God *Brahma* who is its Lord, worshipped it. But the upward foot of the Lord doesn’t stop just at that place viz *Satya*, but rests in the place of supreme effulgent light \(*paranjyothi*\) proclaimed as *‘Satyasya satyam* in the *Upanishads*. This is the principle here. Our respectful *Pradakshiṇa namaskāras* to that *jnānaGaṅgā* who, after participating in the *Sṛshti*, *sthiti* and *laya* and later has positioned herself in the fourth and the superfourth state, which is beyond the commotion of those three \(viz *sṛshṭi*, *sthiti*, and *laya*\)

*Gaṅgā*, who jumped down on the head of *Śiva*, is his infinite power. Lord *Śiva* is the possessor of power. “परास्य शक्तिर्विविधैव श्रूयते स्वाभाविकी ज्ञानबलक्रिया च” “अखिलशक्तिधरः स्वधाम्ना” When a power competes against the sustainer of power, it has to face defeat. “तेन कोऽर्हति स्पर्धितुं” The principle that God is capable of both arresting and also releasing that power, is proclaimed by the story of *Gaṅgā* getting entrapped in the matted hair of Lord *Śiva*.

A *Brahmajnāni’s* right ear is the refuge for knowledge and also the path for the flow of currents of sound which is endowed with divine knowledge. This truth is expounded by the statement of the sages “ब्रह्मण आणी स्थः.” The story of sage *Jahnu* the king of *Jnānis* letting out *Gaṅgā* from his right ear proclaims this very same principle.

The right ear is the place by which the hearing of the current of *praṇava* is fecilitated “शृणुयाद्दक्षिणे कर्णे नादमन्तर्गतं शुभम्”

*Gaṅgā* and *Gaurī* are the two modes of divine knowledge of *Mahādeva*. They are together even in the incarnation state, as they are seen in the original state, and therefore we find them in stories as sisters and as daughters of *Himavān*.

*Gaṅgā* is the flow of *jnāna* which always adorns the head of Lord *Siva*. Sheerly to bless the people, he makes a small part of it to descend, and those who take a dip in that are rendered pure and drawn towards the origin of divine knowledge. This is the exposition of the way, by which a *mahāguru* lifts up the devotees.

When we say *Gaṅgā* is the daughter of *Himavān*, it does not mean that an inert entity called water is born of another inert entity called a mountain, as it may seem to the eyes. The purport is that the *jnānadevi* took birth as the daughter of the mountain’s reigning deity, only to bless him and to render him holy. It is also natural that gods took her back to their place for their work, after the purpose of her incarnation got accomplished. In this way, both the descent of *Gaṅgā* from the heaven to the earth, and her ascent to the heaven from the earth match well.

Thus, the stories about *Gaṅgā* found in our *Āgamas, Itihāsas* and *purāṅas* appear just like stories at first sight. But we understand that they are beautiful compositions which expound a *mahātattva* that is eternally true. Those who merge in them, get all their sense organs sanctified.

What should be done by those people who are unable to have a holy bath directly in the *Gaṅgā* on the day of *Akshaya Tṛtīya*? They should sentimentally feel that the water they are going to use for bathing is *Gaṅgātīrtha* itself. The *jnānaGaṅgā* will bestow her divine presence in that water and sanctify them.

We would like to conclude after discussing briefly, the time science and the science of other modalities pertaining to *Akshaya Tṛtīyā*, and sing the epilogue for the discussion of the festival. Here *Vijnāna* means knowledge backed by discussion “विविच्य ज्ञानम्” and knowledge distinguished by the inference obtained by the study of cause and effect. “विशिष्टं ज्ञानम्”.