+++
title = "0844 Verse 1169-1170"

+++
> **Sanskrit text, Unicode transliteration and English translation by Ganganath Jha:** 
>
> यत्तत्र जडचेतोभिराशङ्कास्पदमिष्यते ।  
> तदेव क्षिप्यते तेन विफलोच्चारणाऽन्यथा ॥ ११६९ ॥  
> किञ्चिद्ध्यशङ्कमानोऽसौ किमर्थं परिपृच्छति ।  
> अतत्संस्कारकं शब्दं ब्रुवन्वा स्वस्थधीः कथम् ॥ ११७० ॥ 
>
> *yattatra jaḍacetobhirāśaṅkāspadamiṣyate* \|  
> *tadeva kṣipyate tena viphaloccāraṇā'nyathā* \|\| 1169 \|\|  
> *kiñciddhyaśaṅkamāno'sau kimarthaṃ paripṛcchati* \|  
> *atatsaṃskārakaṃ śabdaṃ bruvanvā svasthadhīḥ katham* \|\| 1170 \|\| 
>
> What is regarded by dull-witted persons as open to doubt is what is ‘excluded’ by the word in question; otherwise, the utterance of the word would be useless.—If he does not regard anything as open to doubt, then why does he ask (another person) about it?—If one utters a word that does not bring about embellishment (enlightenment),—how can he be regarded as a sane-minded person?—(1169-1170)



## Kamalaśīla’s commentary (tattvasaṃgrahapañjikā):

If what the opponent has said is with reference to the words in question as occurring in a sentence,—then what is said cannot be admitted.—This is shown in the following—[*see verses 1169-1170 above*]

What is ‘excluded’ by the word ‘knowable’ occurring in a sentence is just that which is regarded by *dull-witted persons*—persons with dull intelligence,—as open to doubt. Hence it cannot be admitted that in the case of words like ‘knowable’, there is nothing that can be ‘excluded

‘*Otherwise*’;—if it does not ‘exclude’ what is doubted by dull-witted persons.

It might be argued that—“The listener may have not doubted anything”.

The answer to that is—‘*If he does not regard*, *etc. etc*.—If the listener has no doubts regarding anything, then why does he seek for advice from another person? It is only for ascertaining things that one questions another person; otherwise he would be mad.

It might be argued that—“Even if the listener has any doubts regarding anything, that doubt cannot be removed by the word in question.”

The answer to this is—‘*If one utters a word, etc. etc*.’;—‘*Saṃskāra*’ is *embellishment*, in the form of *the removal of the listener’s doubt*; the word that has this *embellishment* is one that brings about the said *reynoval*; the affix ‘*kap*’ is added according to *Pāṇini’s Sūtra* ‘*Śeṣād vibhāṣā*’.

‘*Bruvan*’,—the explainer using the word.

‘*How can he, etc*. *etc*.’—That is, he would be insane. Because it is only for the embellishment (enlightenment) of listeners that words are used.—(1169-1170)


