+++
title = "06 NOTES"

+++
1. See references in Stanley 1988:7, Jones 1968, and Schoembucher 1993. A small gem of a book (with hardly a single reference to India), which anyone interested in the subject must seriously examine, is Bourguignon 1976; see also Boddy 1994, a global review of secondary literature on possession.
2. “Hinduism” takes on a life of its own when it becomes a concept wielded by a self-interested elite. As Foucault writes about Christianity in his essay “Technologies of the Self,” it “has always been more interested in the history of its beliefs than in the history of its real practices” (Foucault 1988:17). The academicians’ (especially anthropologists’) quest for an “essential culture” is lucidly criticized in Turner and Turner 1998, their controversial book asserting strong, even incontrovertible, evidence for cannibalism among the Anasazi of the American Southwest at the end of the first millennium C.E. It is important to note that though anthropologists were once as guilty as others, e.g., Indologists, of reifying and essentializing culture, anthropologists in particular are now at the forefront of questioning this sort of reification.
3. Humphrey and Laidlaw note, “avowedly atheist academics [still] routinely display deep Protestant prejudices” (1994:57n1). This occurs notably in translations. I understand from William Sax (personal communication, November 1999) that among those who now cast a cold eye on possession are scientists and Hindu nationalists—not surprising in either case, as both trumpet the ultimacy of their respective theologies. I might mention here that one of the problems in dealing with possession in South Asia is that, in spite of the fear and derision cast on it by certain early evangelical Christians (see Chapter 2), it was never the target of colonialist discourse; it was factored out, mostly ignored by nineteenth- and twentieth-century occidentalizing narratives of Hinduism. Thus it was not manipulated, constructed, or reconstructed as part of a colonizing project or a nationalizing discourse. The sub rosa quality of possession, sub rosa perhaps because of the fluidity of the South Asian person, to which the South Asian and the occidental were blind for very different reasons, rendered it unaccountable for either colonizing or nationalizing.
4. Carstairs (1957) observed a pronounced repugnance toward devotional religion and the singing of religious hymns among high-status brahmans, Rajputs, and Jains of Rajasthan. Among academics, however, especially anthropologists, the study of emotion has gained legitimacy in the past three decades; cf. Lynch 1990 and Marks and Ames 1995.
5. This is beginning to change in certain quarters. For example, the town of Mehndipur in eastern Rajasthan hosts a temple to Hanumān, called Bālājī, as well as several other facilities well known for exorcisms and other treatments for psychological disorders; cf. Kakar 1982:53–88; and the recent work of Dwyer, esp. 2003; see also Chapter 4, n. 16. Most of the clientele at Bālājī are from first-generation literate families, thus with strong memories of the lifeways of oral cultures, many of whom come from great distances (relevant here is the work of Luria, cited in Ong 1982). For information above and beyond that presented by Kakar and Dwyer on the possession and temples at Mehndipur, I am indebted to Antti Pakaslahti, who has been conducting fieldwork for many years on the processes of psychological healing that occur there.
6. Ong 1982 develops this as a major theme.
7. Dumont 1970:57. Although Dumont often criticizes his great predecessor, Max Weber, here they agree. In 1917 Weber remarked of brahmans “that orgiastic and emotional-ecstatic elements of the ancient magic rites were not taken over and for long periods either completely atrophied and were tolerated [only] as unofficial folk magic” (1970:345). Cf. Weber 1917 [1970] and 1958:137, cited in Gellner 2001:34. Weber continued: “The status pride of cultured men resisted undignified demands of ecstatic therapeutic practices and the exhibition of neuropathic states … [but] could take quite a different stand toward the forms of apathetic ecstasy … and all ascetic practices capable of rationalization” (1958:149, cited in Gellner 2001:35).
8. I do not feel it is necessary here to problematize the term “religion” or “religious” by replacing it wholesale with “way of life” or any similar phrase, as Ronald Inden and some of his students have done. “Religion” remains an adequate term around which supplementary concepts such as belief, creed, practice, ritual, liturgy, and institution may be organized. See Inden, Walters, and Ali 2000, esp. pp. 23ff.
9. Knipe 1997.
10. Shulman 1991:51.
11. Yocum 1982:187–194.
12. Cf. Halbfass 1988:388–402.
13. This tendency was noted as early as the Atharvaveda; cf. Heesterman 1962. The major exception to this is in bhakti, which, as noted in Chapter 9, does not easily fit the paradigm. The conflict between precept and practice is a major concern of Bell 1992.
14. For my comments on the notion of authenticity in Indian ritual (and in general), see F. Smith 2001b:449–450.
15. Trautmann (1997:23ff.) reminds us that not all orientalist scholars of the earlier periods should be branded as “orientalist” in its current pejorative sense.
16. Considerable attention has been paid in recent years to the “construction” of the ancient and classical “East” by the West. Among the more noteworthy studies are Inden 1990, Trautmann 1997, Bishop 1989.
17. Kosambi and Gokhale 1957:xlvi.
18. That this is true can hardly be doubted, though it is equally true that Kosambi oversimplifies matters. Many of Kosambi’s ideas and historical conclusions are dated.
19. Ibid.:1. Rājaśekhara is, in fact, proud of his literary skills, twice referring to himself as an expert in all languages: sarvabhāṣāvicakṣaṇa in Bālarāmāyaṇa 1.10, and savvabhāṣācadarain Karpūramañjarī 1.8; cf. Karpūramañjarī, ed. Konowand Lanman, p. 199.
20. Lariviere 1995. He proposes three categories of scholarly Other: “orientalist critics,” with Edward Said as its exemplar; “essentialist critics,” typified by Ronald Inden; and “distortionist critics,” including Sheldon Pollock and other postcolonial and postmodern theorists. Lariviere’s terms should, of course, be understood as “critics of orientalism,” “critics of essentialism,” and “critics of distortionism.” Said attained his status as exemplar through his well-known (and often-criticized) work Orientalism (1978); Inden through his thought-provoking (but increasingly criticized) work Imagining India (1990); and Pollock through his brilliant (and controversial) article “Deep Orientalism? Notes on Sanskrit and Power Beyond the Raj” (1993a). Lariviere might peg Kosambi as a prescient postcolonialist, though it is likely that Kosambi would have enjoyed the label.
21. Indeed, the evidence he provides in his article, preliminary though it admittedly is, has less to do with reconstructing the history of India’s underclasses through the construction of critical editions than with a careful reading of well-known Sanskrit texts. For other acknowledgments and discussions of the dissonance between text and the practice of daily life, see Bailey 1995; Salomon 1989.
22. The most ambitious critical editions undertaken thus far (and it is difficult to imagine more ambitious projects) are the Poona Mahābhārata (MBh) and the Baroda Rāmāyaṇa. It is difficult to say that the editions of these texts in their critical incarnations contribute more to our knowledge of the underclasses than does any single manuscript or regional rescension of these texts. One test of Lariviere’s theory would be for a brave, preferably retired, Indologist with an enormous amount of time to spare to examine the entire critical edition of the MBh with all the text-critical notes and appendices of excised passages, thus determining which manuscripts or rescensions contribute most in this area. Perhaps it would be better to sensitively examine texts on śūdradharma. An excellent beginning to this has been made by Vajpeyi 2004, a foray into the “philology of oppression” (I am grateful to her for this felicitous phrase).
23. Gombrich 1988:36–37; see the quotations from Weber in n. 7. Gombrich extends this view to the more general field of emotion: “my guess is that the apparent dearth of emotion in early Indian religion is due to its being censored out by the intelligentsia, both brahman and heterodox, just as they censored out the widespread practice of possession” (p. 170). I am in essential agreement with Gombrich, though I see more evidence of emotion in early Indian religion than Gombrich does; see Smith 1998b.
    It must be noted, however, that control is a major issue in all possession, brahmanical and non-brahmanical. See Wadley 1976 for an account of dank, a ritual of snake possession on the fifth day of the bright half of the month of Śravaṇ (nāg pañcamī), Wadley states, “Control is necessary at all times … there is control for causing possession, cessation of possession, and control during the rite itself. At no point is there lack of control” (p. 247). Gellner essentially supports Gombrich and states, “Lack of control is evident in spirit possession. Thus one can see how both women and low castes are associated with spirit possession, and why high-caste males should shun it, except in closely defined esoteric contexts. This secret possession by the tantric gods of Buddhism and Hinduism is part of tantric initiation in both religions” (2001:42).
24. On the bhūta cults of South Kanara District, see Prabhu 1977. For a more theoretical treatment, see Brückner 1987, 1995. I am also grateful to Edwin Gerow, who informed me of his own observations in Karnataka. For another important study of possession among brahman women, see Harper 1963.
25. Sax 1991.
26. Cf. Hancock 1995.
27. I have observed brahmans undergoing exorcism and expiation for spirit possession in Pune (various temples and exorcists), Varanasi (Piśācmocan temple), central Kerala, and Bālājī.
28. For Tibet and Nepal, see, for example, Mumford 1989. For Thailand see Morris 2000. Both Mumford and Morris observe a conflict of interests. On the one hand, both lay Buddhists and priests condemn shamanistic practice, including varieties of possession, perhaps a relic of clashes long past. On the other hand, they furtively—though sometimes openly—attend these same ceremonies. Thus it comes as no surprise that Morris observes: “For many Buddhist men, mediumship still has the rank odor of the feminine and emanates the aura of a not-yet-recuperated primitiveness” (p. 85), recapitulating a stereotype that has persisted for millennia. Nevertheless, in later—though by no means recent—forms of Buddhism there was a reaction against this. See, for example, Faure 1998:100–104. He refers to eccentrics in Chan Buddhism who “seem to represent the nostalgia of a lost spontaneity” (p. 102). These eccentrics were initially regarded as subversive and dangerous, but after they became culturally fashionable they lost their subversive edge. This transgressiveness revealed a deep-seated ambivalence, which served “to legitimize the norm that it transgresse[d], like an exception confirming the rule” (p. 104). This masculine construction of the weakness of women was expressed as penetrability, no doubt sexual in origin, which Morris sees in “the ethnography of Buddhist gender ideology … as softness or pliability. Thus women are deemed within dominant ideology to be soft-souled or malleable as well as volatile.… For this reason, they are said to be particularly unsuited to the ascetic traditions of Buddhist meditation and particularly likely vehicles for spirits” (pp. 124–25).
29. See Chapter 5 on Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad (BAU) 3.3.1, 3.7.1.
30. Gombrich 1988:64; also: “both brahmanism and Buddhism oppose possession and commend self-control” (p. 145).
31. States of possession often are ritually controlled, as in the Siri cult in South Kanara district of Karnataka (Claus 1979).
32. Trans. by White 1996:12.
33. Boddy 1994:407.
34. This problem has arisen for other scholars as well. See, for example, Shulman 2002, who rightly labels the term possession “problematic” (p. 145) and admits to using it “with some trepidation” (p. 133).
35. See Csordas 1994:222ff., 252ff., for discussions on the criteria for spontaneity and control in American Charismatic Catholic trance healing. Spontaneity lies outside the accepted boundaries of intentionality.
36. Ong 1982:105. The literature on orality has advanced considerably in recent years; cf. Falk 1990 and Lopez 1995a, both of which are concerned more with the dynamics of orality and scripture than with the dynamics of culture.
37. See the incisive comments of Morris (2000) on remembering, forgetting, and literacy,
38. See Hufford 1977, indicating an incomplete hypostatization of oral exegesis into the ideologies of literacy; Davidson 2002, on the influence of nonliterate people on Mahāyāna Buddhism; and Campany 1996, esp. ch. 1. Campany writes: “As scholars including Walter Ong, Jack Goody, Michel de Certeau, and Jacques Derrida have shown, writing lends itself to ‘fixing’ objects of discourse by creating a uniform field of textual space and time in which they assume a definite place” (p. 16). Countering this, however, is a “nostalgia for the oral [which] is often part of a larger protest against the sort of locative cosmography for which writing had served as a medium” (ibid.). Although this nostalgia is largely unconscious, it helps explain why possession could not be effectively suppressed among the literate in classical India.
39. Erndl 1996:178. See Daniel 1984:227 on the impossibility of studying a culture in its own terms, but for its own terms. We must keep Daniel’s caveat in mind throughout this study.
40. Eliade 1969:339, also 320; cf. Eliade 1964:411ff.
41. Eliade 1969:339; Lewis 1989.
42. In a different context, Benz (1972) distinguishes between emotion (Ergriffenheit) and frenzy or spirit possession (Besessenheit). Ergriffenheit indicates blessing, healing, renewal, while Besessenheit indicates malevolent and destructive possession); cited by Schoembucher 1993:241–42.
43. Fuller 1992:231.
44. I explore the vocabulary and senses of possession in both their “microstructures” and “macrostructures,” as elucidated by Gonda 1962: “There are ‘microstructures’: ‘meanings’ which are complex, consisting of semantic aspects, grouped round a ‘kernel’; there are also ‘macrostructures’ or ‘fields’ composed of groups of words which are in some way or other—morphologically, notionally, etc.—more closely associated” (p. 245); also Gonda 1970a:177–178.
45. I cannot treat this fully this here, so it must be reserved for a future article. But see, e.g., BhP 4.7.26, cinmātram; 5.12.11, jñānaṃ viśuddham; 5.19.4, viśuddhānubhavamātram; 8.18.12, avyaktacit; 10.51.57, jñaptimātram.
46. Were I to struggle for a definition of consciousness in the present context, I would begin by revisiting the discussion of over a century ago by William James in Varieties of Religious Experience (1958:140–156), in which he considers it an open-ended, responsive, and adaptive mental activity.
47. The philosophical analysis of consciousness is problematized differently in the fields of neurophysiology and cognitive science. The questions raised by neurobiologists ultimately involve behavioral and cognitive function. But, asks David Chalmers, a cognitive scientist, why is it necessary for these functions to be accompanied by conscious experience? This question remains unanswered, but the issues it raises are now being addressed by physicists, neuropsychologists, geneticists, information theorists, and an array of metaphysicians. Chalmers (1997) sees an explanatory gap between physical processes and consciousness, which, he posits, may be negated (if not closed) by considering consciousness as an independent, irreducible, fundamental property in a final “theory of everything.” As such, awareness would be defined as physical and objective, while its psychophysical counterpart, consciousness, would not. See also Black, Flanagan, and Güzeldere 1996.
    I should acknowledge that “states of consciousness” have different constructions in the contexts of South Asian philosophical and religious textuality: deep sleep, dream, waking, or, in the Upaniṣads and elsewhere, turīya, a fourth transcendent state. It has also been construed as a momentary finite unit connected by time or innate tendency. Elsewhere it has been regarded as identical with thought, with the thinking I; as the central product of embodiment; as an event connected with embodiment but not necessarily limited to it, and so on. Much modern anthropological and philosophical reflection on the term draws on Merleau-Ponty’s now rather quaint view (1962) that consciousness derives from embodiment. As noted in the previous paragraph, the questions asked today are nuanced differently.
48. Taylor 1998a.
49. Winquist states, in partial introduction to his article in that volume on the concept of person: “It is a commonplace in scholarship to recognize that words, ideas, or concepts are embedded in historical and cultural settings and cannot be isolated or abstracted without being misplaced, or translated without accounting for the transformation of or the difference in the cultural milieu into which the word is rendered or onto which it is inscribed” (1998:225).
50. Halbfass 1988:388–402.
51. Proudfoot 1985; Sharf 1995, 1998.
52. Sharf 1998:111.
53. Cf., e.g., Yogasūtras 1.11, 4.4, and Vyāsa’s commentary. Opposed to this is, e.g., Chāndogya Upaniṣad 7.26.2. For a good description of memory in brahmanical thought, see Caraka Saṃhitā, Śārīrasthāna 1.148–151.
54. Sharf writes elsewhere: “The notion that the term ‘experience’ is self-evident betrays a set of specifically Cartesian assumptions, according to which experience is held to be immediately present to consciousness. It would appear that the phenomenological transparency of consciousness—what Richard Rorty has called the ‘glassy essence’ or ‘mirror of nature’ picture of mind (Rorty 1979)—is reproduced in the conceptual transparency of the category ‘experience,’ obviating the need for definitional precision or critical analysis” (1995:229).
55. Mauss 1938 [1966]. The volume in which the English translation appears, in The Category of the Person, ed. Carrithers et al., is dedicated to unpacking the legacy of Mauss’s essay and includes one article dedicated to the “person” in South Asia (Sanderson 1985:190–216). Less Indological, but more anthropologically informed, is Carrithers (1985:234–256).
56. Critiqued by Allen, in Carrithers et al. 1985:26–45. See also Lynch: “it suffers from its evolutionary framework, which can be read as putting the Western idea of the fully individualized self as the height of progress, rather than as a different idea of the self” (2003:474).
57. Translation of Mauss 1938 by W. D. Hall in Carrithers et al. 1985. This deceptively simple statement may be used to counter in part the tired (and tiresome) idea, caricatured from Dumont, that Indians have little or no independent self-identity, only a corporate or systemic reflexivity.
58. Sanderson comments on Mauss: “What is striking in his cursory treatment is not so much his evolutionism as the inadequacy of his evidence and his lack of sociological and historical perspective” (1985:190).
59. Mauss 1938:18.
60. See Shulman 1994:26f. I address Shulman’s views more fully in dealing with the Mahābhārata in Chapter 6.
61. This is explored more extensively below; cf. Marriott 1976.
62. Csordas 1994:14.
63. Winquist 1998:229.
64. On ātman (self), its relation with nara (person), and its use dialogically by Abhinavagupta, see Dupuche 2001.
65. See Larson and Bhattacharya 1987:73f.
66. Cf. Kaṭha Upaniṣad, 4.12,13, 6.17; Śvetāśvatara Up. 5.8; etc.
67. Gonda 1965:266.
68. Collins 1982:160, 172, for mention of an ‘inner soul” (abbhantare jīva), used conventionally, in the Milinda Pañha.
69. The texts Collins exploited were the Visuddhimagga, Dīgha Nikāya, Nettipakaraâa, Anguttara Nikāya, Saṃyutta Nikāya, Paramattha-joṭikā, and the Katthāvatthu. The latter is discussed in Cousins 1994, which relates Vasubandhu’s representation of the Vātsīputrīyas, a remnant sect of early Buddhism that maintained a certain pudgalavāda view based on the coalescence of the aggregates or skandhas. See also the references cited in ibid.:28n6.
    In Jainism, poggala is an ontological category that denotes particles of matter or basic constituents of nature. These can be aggregated, recombined, and transformed to yield substances (davya < Skt. dravya) that may serve as a locus for a jīva. But they do not in themselves bear the weight of a person or personality. Cf. Deleu 1970:145, 183f., passim.