+++
title = "२४ साध्योपाय-शोधनाधिकारः"

+++

२४ साध्योपाय-शोधनाधिकारः  
॥ श्रीः ॥  
॥ श्रीमते निगमान्तमहादेशिकाय नमः ॥  
॥ श्रीमद्रहस्यत्रयसारे साध्योपायशोधनाधिकारः ॥

(24) THE CHAPTER ON THE CLARIFICATION OF

WHAT IS MEANT BY _SĀDHYOPĀYA_ OR

THE _UPĀYA_ THAT HAS TO BE ADOPTED.page319



SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_:



यथाधिकरणं प्रभुर्यजनदानहोमार्चना-

भरन्यसनभावनाप्रभृतिभिस्समाराधितः ।  
फलं दिशति देहिनामिति हि संप्रदायस्थितिः  
श्रुतिस्मृतिगुरूक्तिभिर्नयवतीभिराभाति नः ॥ ५३ ॥

It appears to us, from the _śruti_s, _smṛti_s and the words of _guru_s fortified by reason, that the Omnipotent Lord being propitiated by yajnas (sacrifices ), gifts made in charity, offerings made in the fire (homa ), adoration, surrender of responsibility (bhara_nyāsa_ ), constant meditation (_bhakti_ _yoga_) and the like in accordance with one's competence confers benefits on men. This is also what religious tradition prescribes,



THE NEED FOR THE CLARIFICATION OF WHAT IS

MEANT BY _SĀDHYOPĀYA_:



A man may have a clear knowledge of _Siddhopāya_ (viz. _Bhagavān_) who is omniscient, omnipotent and supremely compassionate, who, along with His Spouse, is the _śeṣī_ of all and the Saviour of the whole world: he may even have become perfect in his averseness to _samsāra_ , by seeing that what is considered agreeable by unintelligent persons is really disagreeable as stated in the _śloka_: "Health' gives (only) potency to the senses; wealth (only) creates enemies; long life makes one suffer bereavement of relations, What is there in these things that can delight a man?", He may have acquired an eager longing for the attainment of the Supreme Being as stated in the _śloka_ :- "He who loves _Bhagavān_, the Supreme Being, has no love for anything else"; he may have the feeling of urgency in regard to _mokṣa_ as stated in the _śloka_ :- "By paying a heavy price in the form of virtuous deeds, this boat of a body has been bought. Before this boat is broken (or becomes leaky), hasten to cross the sea of sorrow'. In spite of all these, if he does not clearly understand (all) about the _Sādhyopāya_, prescribed in the injunction, “Seek refuge under me alone" and in the sentence which expresses the action, "I seek refuge" (in _Dvaya_), which is the means of extinguishing the punishment inflicted by _Bhagavān_ which binds a map to _samsāra_ and which resulted from beginningless and continued violation of His commands - if he does not understand it, there is no way of propitiating and winning the grace of the Supreme Ruler, who is the _Siddhopāya_. Therefore we will remove misconceptions that might arise concerning (1) competence therefor (2) the nature of _Sādhyopāya_ and (3) the accessories pertaining to it.



COMPETENCE: _PRAPATTI_ IS OPEN TO ALL (CASTES):



There are some who will ask: " This _prapatti_ is a _dharma_ prescribed in the Vedas. If so, how can it be said that every one (of all castes) is qualified to perform it?" The answer to this question is given on the authority of the Svetasvatara _Śruti_, which says that the Supreme Ruler is the Saviour of all. This truth is confirmed by expository passages like the following: “Take me to Raghava who is the Protector of all the worlds”, and in _śloka_s like:--"You should seek the protection of _Viṣṇu_ who is fit to be approached by every one, who is easy of approach, who can never go wrong and has no one to compare with Him and who removes the suffering of those who perform _prapatti_". It is confirmed also by passages in the Sātvatasamhita (2.9), which says that all the three castes beginning with the Kṣatriyas and ending with the Śūdras who have performed _prapatti_, are competent to adore the four vyūhas, without _mantra_s. So also is

"The man born even into low castes who has performed _prapatti_ once to _Bhagavān_ -- that man is protected by _Bhagavān_ from the ills of _samsāra_ even though he is a patricide or a matricide."



It is true that _upāsana_ or meditation (in accordance with the teaching of the Upaniṣads ) has been determined as fit (only) for the three higher castes in the section Apaśūdra; bat speaking the truth which is given as an injunction in the Vedas is enjoined for all castes; so also _prapatti_ is a _dharma_ common to all and may be performed either with Vedic _mantra_s or with _mantra_s found in the Tantras in accordance with the person's respective competence, without any violation of propriety. We have heard, in the s'astras, of even such beings as crows performing _prapatti_. The Saviour Himself has declared: "Women," Vaiśyas and Śūdras that are born of sinners - whoever they might be -they attain, O Partha, the highest state if they seek my protection". Here seeking of the Lord for protection by _bhakti_ or _prapatti_ is stated to be common to all. Even in the matter of _upāsana_ or meditation (according to the vidyās in the Upaniṣads) though the beginning can be made only by men in the three higher castes, the end of the course can be attained by men in the bodies of any caste. This is stated in _Viṣṇudharma_ in the following _śloka_ :-"Though _Dharmavyādha _and others belonged to low and gruesome castes, yet since, in their previous births, they had practised _bhakti_yoga, they continued it in their latest life and, having completed it therein, attained their goal like [^68] Sramani.”

[^68]:
(Śabari) or Śramaṇi was of the caste of hunters and attained _mukti_ by _bhakti_ to Bhāgavatas and _Bhagavān_.


Thus _upāsana_ or _bhakti_ _yoga_ should be commenced only by the three higher castes. But there is no such restriction in the general statement about the competence for _prapatti_. Further in the special statement about the qualifications for _prapatti_, it is definitely declared that every one is fit to adopt _prapatti_. The special qualifications requisite for _prapatti_ have already been described by us.

Therefore birth in the three higher castes or the absence of it is no compliance for _prapatti_, when unaccompanied by the inability to adopt other _upāya_s. The only qualification that is essential is _ākiñcanya_, inability to adopt other _upāya_s). This may be seen from the Tamil verse: "I was not born into any of the four castes to enable me to perform _dharma_", and from the _śloka_: "O Thou Saviour! I was born into a family renowned in the world for their fame, their purity, their practice of _yoga_, their knowledge of the truth concerning matter (_prakṛti_) with its three qualities and the _jīva_s and for their steadfast attachment to Thy lotus like feet, and yet with a mind inclined to sin, I am sunk in _samsāra_: and am going down." Therefore it is beyond doubt that competence for _prapatti_ is open to persons of all castes who have a knowledge of the Saviour and of _śaraṇāgati_ and possess also _ākiñcanya_ and the like.



MISCONCEPTIONS ABOUT THE NATURE OR SVARUPA OF _PRAPATTI_:



The statement of learned men that the _śaraṇāgati_ referred to in _Dvaya_ means only faith in the two feet of Nārāyaṇa being the only _upāya_ for the attainment of Nārāyaṇa with His Spouse----- this statement should be taken to mean only that faith in _śaraṇāgati_ in the mind of the person and faith as an accessory to _prapatti_ are very important. (It does not mean that faith alone is enough). So also the words of the author of _Śrī_ _Bhāṣya_ .--"_Prapatti_ is faith; it is prayer accompanied by a faith that _Bhagavān_ will grant whatever is desired on account of a single act of prayer" come these words of the _Bhāṣya_kara emphasise the importance of faith at the beginning and then declare in the words of Bharatamuni which define _prapatti_ that _prapatti_ is a prayer (for help) with faith (in the person whose help is sought). (It has been shown already that) surrender of self is the _aṅgī_ and that the others (like _kārpaṇya_) are _aṅga_s (i...) Accessories. "_Nyāsa_ bastol been declared as having five accessories or _aṅga_s." Therefore these words of the _Bhāṣya_. kara that _prapatti_ consists in prayer (for help) which might mean that the Lord expects only the prayer for help should be understood only as emphasising the importance of one of the _aṅga_s (namely, the seeking of the Lord's protection ), for it is said "The Lord expects the expression of the desire for protection". This is only one of the _aṅga_s (and not the _aṅgī_). (The _Bhāṣya_kara should not be taken as stating that the prayer alone will do). In the shorter _Gadya_ also (_Śrī_r_aṅga_gadya), _Śrī_ _Rāmānuja_ makes the prayer with faith preceding it and concludes with the words namostu te (i.e.) "I bow to Thee". Further he uses the word s'aranam which means seeking (the Lord) as _upāya_. From these two, it is evident that self-surrender is present. That the word _namas_ in namostute means surrender of self is well-known from such passages as the following:-- "I bow" to Bhagavao to whom, having surrendered his self which is what is meant by namaskāra, a man gets rid of his suffering and enjoys whatever he desires." In _Śrī_ _Vaikuṇṭha_ _Gadya_ the surrender of self preceded by prayer is explicit. Therefore (since _Śrī_ _Rāmānuja_ states in _Vaikuṇṭha_ - _Gadya_: "Praying for protection), the person should surrender his (or her) self to Bhagaven after bowing to Him,") it is clear that surrender of self is different from the prayer for protection and is the angī with the prayer as an _aṅga_. It has therefore to be concladed that in the words: "One should" surrender one's self by uttering this _mantra_", and "the surrender" of one's self and of what belongs to one's self", the _aṅgī_ which is surrender of self, is declared as a _vidhi_ or injunction.

If this were not accepted (as true), it would lead to construing the sentence "Saranāgati is of six kinds" in its apparent meaning and thinking that the five accessories or _aṅga_s of _prapatti_ are, every one of them, a form of _prapatti_ or angī, in the same way as we conclude that there are seven different kinds of ablution (snāna) from the sentence :- "Ablution is said to be of seven kinds".

If it is argued that the _aṅga_s are not considered to be _aṅgī_s on account of the statement: “One should perform _prapatti_ with its five _aṅga_s or accessories," then by the force of the same argument and in accordance with the statement "Nyása is accompanied by five _aṅga_s", we should, in reason, correct such statements as "_Prapatti_ is prayer" and "_Prapatti_ is faith", and hold that " _Nikṣepa_ or surrender is the augi", and that the rest are ( only) _aṅga_s,

Even if we judge by the principle that, (when there is a difference in the statements ), that statement which is made in a larger number of contexts should be accepted as true, it would be evident, from a study of the chapters on _Prapatti_ in Sātvika Tantra, _Lakṣmī_ Tantra, Ahirbudhriya Samhita, and the like, that _Nikṣepa_ or self-surrender is the _aṅgī_. Even in the _śloka_ :-"Thou alone, shouldst be my _upāya_. It is this idea of prayer that is called _śaraṇāgati_", it is indicated by suggestion in the word _upāya_ coming along with the word 'alone' that what is referred to is _bharanyāsa_ or surrender of responsibility which is the main theme in that context. Even in ordinary life, an accessory is often spoken of as if it were the main thing in order to emphasise some one aspect or other. The word ülambha, which means 'killing' is employed to mean also '_yāga_ or sacrifice in a wider sense; so also in "seek refuge" in the _Carama_ _śloka_ and the like, the verbs signify the sacrifice of the self or ātma yiiga, which is usually expressed by such words as vyāsa, _nikṣepa_ and tyāga (surrender), This is in keeping with Vedic usage.

What is called _yāga_ is a special form of thought indicating that a particular offering (_havis_) is made to a particular deity. Ātmayāga or the sacrifice (or surrender of self) is (likewise) a special form of thought indicating this : « My soul, which is the most delicious of offerings (_havis_ ), is for _Śrīman_ Nārāyaṇa. We have already stated (on page ____) that in this surrender of self, the nature of the action to be performed which is common to all .who desire benefits of whatever kind is the surrender of the responsibility for protection.

SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_S :

*हविस्समर्पणादत्र प्रयोगविधिशक्तितः । आत्मरक्षाभरन्यासोऽकिञ्चनस्यातिरिच्यते ॥  
अतश्श्रीराममिश्राद्यैर्भरन्यासविवक्षया । स्वप्रवृत्तिनिवृत्त्यंशः प्रपत्तिरिति लक्षितः ॥  
अकृते तु भरन्यासे रक्षापेक्षणमात्रतः । पश्चात् स्वयत्नविरतिर्न प्रसिद्ध्यति लोकवत् ॥  
आकिञ्चन्यभरन्यासोपायत्वप्रार्थनात्मनाम् । त्रयाणां सौहृदं सूक्ष्मं यः पश्यति स पश्यति ॥

Here in the surrender of self for the sake of _mokṣa_, since there is to be made an offering (_havis_), owing to the injunction regarding the manner in which the offering should be made, there is an additional feature for the man who is destitute of other _upāya_s, namely, the surrender of the responsibility for the protection of the self. Therefore by sach authors as Rama Misra (Uyyakkondar) and others, when they want to speak of the surrender of responsibility (bhara_nyāsa_), a single aspect of it, namely, the abstention from his own activity on the part of the _prapanna_ has been used to indicate _prapatti_. As in the world of ordinary life, when the surrender of responsibility has not been made, abstention from one's own activity will not result thereafter merely from the request for protection. He who sees the subtle feature that is common to these three, namely, being destitute of all _upāya_s for protection, surrender of responsibility and the prayer for being the _upāya_ --- he alone sees. (That subtle feature which is common to all the three of them is refraining from all activity of one's own for one's protection. Since there is this common feature in all the three, the other two are sometimes used to denote _bharanyāsa_).





Thus the surrender of one's responsibility for the protection of one's self is the main injunction that is made in all _śāstra_s treating of _prapatti_ and it has five accessories. (Such eminent authorities) as _Śrī_ _Viṣṇu_cbitta, Vadihamsambuvaha, and Varadacharya have succinctly stated (this truth).

THE KNOWLEDGE THAT ONE IS _ŚEṣA_ TO THE

LORD IS NOT IN ITSELF _PRAPATTI_:

3. There are some who say: "When a man has understood the truth regarding the _tattva_s from the _śāstra_s, has he not realised his relationship as _śeṣa_ to _Bhagavān_ ? Further, in the _śloka_, "If you desire to attain the highest state and to adopt the _upāya_ for it, remember that Hari is (your) master and that you are His servant and that this relationship exists for ever by the very nature (of things)” (in this _śloka_) -- is not the meaning as follows:- "If you desire the highest goal of life and the means of attaining it, you should understand clearly that you are the servant and that _Iśvara_ is the master and that this relationship exists by nature"? They ask, "When this is so, is there an action (besides the thought of the relationship) enjoined called ātmasamarpanam?". This question does not deserve any consideration, just like the dictum (of the Advaitins) that, by the mere knowledge of the text of the *_śruti_ [Texts like "That Thou art" and "I am _Brahma_"] . _mokṣa_ can be attained.

SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_S:

जितकौस्तुभचौर्यस्य सम्राजस्सर्वपाप्मनाम् ।  
शिष्टं ह्यात्मापहारस्य निष्कृतिस्स्वभरार्पणम् ॥  
परशेषत्वधीमात्रमधिकारिविशेषकम् ।  
पश्चादात्मापहारस्य निरोधाय च कल्पते ॥

To the man who prides himself of having stolen from _Bhagavān_ the gem Kaustubha (which is the symbol of his soul) and who is the prince of all sinners (ie. the greatest of all sinners) the surrender of responsibility (_bharanyāsa_) (to the Lord) has been enjoined as an expiation. The thought that he is the _śeṣa_ of the Supreme Being, which qualifies the _prapanna_, serves also to prevent the theft of the soul (atmapahāra) in the future (1.6.) after _prapatti_.

The man first understands from the săstras that his self which is a Real (Tattva) has the attribute of being a _śeṣa_. Then with this competency and with the accessories pertaining (to _prapatti_) and also with the specific idea of the particular benefit desired, he surrenders the responsibility for the protection of his soul (to _Bhagavān_) bearing in mind his relationship as a _śeṣa_. This surrender of responsibility which is enjoined as an _upāya_ for the remission of the punishment resulting from endless sins is indeed what is called ātmasamarpana (the surrender of the self ).

When it is said that _mokṣa_ is attained by a knowledge of the truth, it should be understood as meaning that it is only by way of leading to the adoption of an _upāya_. This is evident from the authority of the injunction (_vidhi_) contained in such passages as "Worship** me" and "seek 18cefage under me".

SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_ :

ज्ञानान्मोक्षोपदेशे हि तत्पूर्वोपासनादिना ।  
उपासनादिरूपाद्वा ज्ञानान्मोक्षो विवक्षितः ॥

The instruction which states:- "From knowledge arises _mokṣa_", should be understood in one of two ways:- _Bhakti_ preceded by _jñāna_ or knowledge leads to _mokṣa_ or from _jñāna_ or knowledge, which is of the nature of _bhakti_, results in _mokṣa_ (for _bhakti_ is itself a form of knowledge).

Similarly the knowledge of the relationship of being a _śeṣa_ to the Lord which arises from a study of the śāstra is common to all forms of activity for _mokṣa_, by refraining from the worldly life, like _bharanyāsa_ and _upāsana_ or _bhakti_, Since the activity of the _śeṣa_, namely, service, is the extreme limit of the goal of attainment, it is certainly not possible to adopt any of the _upāya_s enjoined for _mokṣa_, without understanding the relationship of _śeṣa_ to the Lord. Even if a man adopts the _dharma_s enjoined for the attainment of _mokṣa_ without knowing this relationship of being a _śeṣa_, these _dharma_s or _upāya_s themselves will (in course of time) produce that knowledge of the relationship and will become the cause of _mokṣa_ by making the adoption of the _upāya_ perfect and complete. So the atmasamarpanam that is enjoined for performance is not the mere knowledge of the relationship of being a _śeṣa_; if it is asked what, then, it is, the answer is that it is the surrender of the responsibility for one's protection accompanied by such things as the knowledge of the relationship of being a _śeṣa_.

SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_.

वाक्यमात्रेण सिद्धत्वात्सिद्धोपाय इहोच्यते ।  
प्रपत्तिरिति वादोऽपि विधिनात्र विहन्यते ॥

The contention that the particular kind of knowledge called _prapatti_ results merely from the sentences or passages of the _śāstra_, that it is, on that account, called _siddhopāya_ and that it is not an _upāya_ to be accomplished by a certain activity -- this contention also is refuted by the injunction or _vidhi_ (saranam vraja).

If it is argued that “s'aranam vraja”[ "seek protection" ] merely means “Know this truth (that the Lord is the Saviour)", the answer is that it is opposed to the natural and obvious meaning of the words. It would also be against the plain and explicit rules or vidhis for the performance of _prapatti_ as in the sentence: "Perform this _prapatti_ accompanied by its five accessories or _aṅga_s." If it is held that what is intended in the _Carama_ _śloka_ is merely this, that _Iśvara_ is the _upāya_ for _mokṣa_ and that no activity is enjoined in this _śloka_ for the man who wants _mokṣa_, it would mean that it is merely the teaching of a truth that is needed for _bhakti_ _yoga_, which is the subject treated in that context. (The _Carama_ _śloka_ would then cease to have anything to do with _prapatti_),

REFRAINING FROM ONE'S OWN ACTIVITY IS

NOT IN ITSELF _PRAPATTI_:

There are some who hold that _prapatti_ is merely refraining from one's own activity for protecting oneself and that what is enjoined for its accomplishment is only the abandonment of all _dharma_s or _upāya_s. The answer to this view is as follows:- Even though it is abstention, this abandonment of all _dharma_s is itself an activity or _dharma_ of the person for his own protection (and this would be inconsistent with their own words). Further this view is in conflict also with the passage (quoted above) enjoining the performance of _prapatti_ with its five _aṅga_s.

The view held by some that the regarding of _prapatti_ as an _upāya_ or as an auxiliary to _Siddhopāya_ (for _mokṣa_ ) is opposed to the doctrine that the _Siddhopāya_, namely, _Iśvara_, is the only _upāya_, that He is already an existent _upāya_, that He is the Supreme Sentient, that He has supreme compassion, and omnipotence and that He is independent of all others -- this view is at variance with the _śruti_s and the _smṛti_s. It is not based on any general proposition such as: "Wherever an auxiliary condition is required, there cannot be a single _upāya_" and "Where an accessory is required, there is no independent doership"). Since there are these objections and others, this view is based on fallacious reasoning. If it were considered sound reasoning, it would mean that, even in _upāsana_, whatever is accepted as auxiliary should be rejected as unnecessary.

If it were further argued that even _upāsana_ is not a means or _upāya_, it would be inconsistent with what has been stated elsewhere by those who hold this view, for while commenting on the passage, "Having given up all _dharma_s, seek refuge under me", they interpret the word _dharma_ as _upāsana_ or _upāya_ for the attainment of _mokṣa_. If they contend that in order to remove Arjuna's haughtiness, _Śrī_ Kṛṣṇa prescribes unnecessary burdens and uses the word _dharma_ to mean what Arjuna, in his delusion or inability to understand the real purport of the teaching, considers as necessary _upāya_s in the phrase "all _dharma_s", (the answer is as follows):It is stated (in Yagnyavalkya _Smṛti_ 1-8):-- "The adoration of the Lord, personal purity, control of the senses, non-violence, giving in charity, repeating the Vedas, other Vedic rites - among all these, having a vision of the Supreme Being by karına _yoga_, _jñāna_ _yoga_ and _bhakti_ _yoga_ is the highest _dharma_". Again it is said - "Among all _dharma_s, the _dharma_ which consists in the adoration of _Viṣṇu_ is the highest, for He protects His devotee as if he were His own body"; and farther, "There is no other _karma_" enjoined in the Vedas for the expiation of sins than the adoration of _Viṣṇu_". If those well-known _dharma_s which are described as supreme and which are activities for _mokṣa_ of the nature of abstention from worldly action, are stated to be no _dharma_s, much more so would the _dharma_s prescribed for worldly ends cease to be _dharma_s, and none of the _śāstra_s would carry any authority or weight. Those who hold those views would then line up with atheists and heretics.

It may be asked: (The words in the Gita are): "Give up all _dharma_s". In order that the meaning of the word ‘all’ may not be contracted or reduced in application, since the seeking of the Lord's protection is also denoted by the word _dharma_ just like upāsanas, should it not also be given up, in as much as it is also an _upāya_ or sādhana? Similarly to consider _prapatti_ as a sādhana, or _upāya_ or an auxiliary condition is at variance with the words in the Gita: "Give up all _dharma_s or _upāya_s.". We ask in reply :-"(What do you really mean?) If you mean that we should adopt the _upāya_ giving up the thought that it will directly and by itself lead to the end in view, it applies also equally to _bhakti_ _yoga_. If it is meant that we should give up the thought of _prapatti_ being a _dharma_ even for winding the grace of the Lord, we answer, “In that case, you will have to give up even the thought that _Siddhopāya_, namely, "_Śrī_ Kṛṣṇa, is the eternal _dharma_ or _upāya_ ", in order that the meaning of all in all _dharma_s may not suffer reduction of application.

If it is argued that what are to be abandoned are all _dharma_s other than the one described in this passage - (namely, the _Carama_ _śloka_ ), the same answer might be given in support of the performance of _śaraṇāgati_ which is prescribed in this very passage: (saranam vraja).A further doubt might arise as follows:- “Upāsanas, as _upāya_s, require that they should be originated or started; _upāsana_s have to be promoted to higher and higher perfection; _upāsana_s require the fulfilment of auxiliary conditions - Not so, this _upāya_, namely _Bhagavān_. He does not require to be originated or increased in intensity nor does He require any auxiliary help or means of approach. He is eternal, has neither growth nor decay and has always such qualities as full and perfect compassion which are of His very nature. Without any means of approach, He is ever existent as an _upāya_ and is of irresistible might: Of what use, then, are _bhakti_ and _prapatti_ in His case ?" The answer is that they help to obtain remission of the punishment which is the cause of _samsāra_ and which has been inflicted for beginningless and successive acts of offence. When these _upāya_s are adopted for other benefits (than _mokṣa_ ) (for instance, _svarga_), they generate favourable dispositions (in the Lord) suited to the attainment of the respective benefits, just like Jyotishtoma and the like and thus serve as aids. In the case of the man who desires _mokṣa_, they, as _vyāja_ or _Sādhyopāya_, cause appeasement in _Siddhopāya_ so as to cancel the punishment and then to remove the contraction of knowledge and the like due to that punishment, so that _Siddhopāya_ or the Lord confers (on the person) benefits extending up to perfect service. It is in this way these _upāya_s help as long as the self lasts.

. Therefore those _pramāṇa_s or authoritative passages which state that _Siddhopāya_ (the Lord) confers the ultimate goal of perfect service (_kaiṅkarya_ ) along with preliminary benefits after removing all undesirable hindrances and that sādhyopaya (_bhakti_ and _prapatti_) leads to these benefits by propitiating _Siddhopāya_ - these _pramāṇa_s are both apposite and agree with one another very well.

IS THERE ANY NEED FOR THE _ŚĀSTRA_

ENJOINING _PRAPATTI_ ?

Notwithstanding all this, some may ask: "Why should the _śāstra_ enjoin this _upāya_ called _prapatti_? (The _śāstra_ has to help only when man cannot find out things for himself with his common sense or reason). In ordinary life, when a man is about to sink (into ruin ) because he cannot protect himself, he seeks the protection of some one who happens to be by his side and who has the ability to protect him. In the same way, if a man has understood himself and _Iśvara_ from the śāstra which treats of the existent _upāya_, will he not seek _Iśvara_ for protection, of his own accord, (without the _śāstra_ enjoining it)? So there is no propriety in the _śāstra_ prescribing _prapatti_ in the place of _bhakti_.

This question is based on appropriate reasoning but proceeds too far. This is how it goes too far. In ordinary life (in the world) when a man seeks the help of another, he tries to learn before-hand in what way he should approach the other, so that the latter may take pity on him and then he seeks his protection. Similarly we should know who is competent to seek _Iśvara_'s protection and in what manner he should do so, so that the Lord may protect him; there is no _pramāṇa_ or authority other than the _śāstra_ which deals with what should be done and which can tell us how we should proceed to seek His help. It cannot be maintained that, by means of inference (or anumāna), we can understand that the Lord will protect if we seek refuge under Him and then seek His protection. For in that case, every one who has a know. ledge of the truth concerning _Iśvara_ may adopt the means in the manner suggested by his own inference and the texts in the _śāstra_ which prescribe _upāsana_ (_bhakti_) would then become useless. The distinction that he who is capable should adopt _upāsana_ and the like and that he who is not capable of them should resort to _prapatti_ - this distinction cannot be established by means of inference ( anumāna ). If the stāstra does not enjoin the performance of _prapatti_ in the place of other _upāya_s to those who are incapable of them, they will have to lose the fruit of these other _upāya_s as they are not competent enough for their proper performance. This is how it stands. Though in ordinary life (in the world), we see service to kings and the like conferring certain benefits, yet we hold that in regard to the weaving of garlands, the lighting of lamps, the singing of hymns, the act of prostrating, and so on (in temples), if these things are done without any reference to the _śāstra_s (as to how they should be done!, they will become offences. The worship of _Bhagavān_ and His service have to be done with the right accessories as laid down in the _śāstra_s and the fruits arising therefrom have also to be understood only from the _śāstra_s. In the same way, although we see instances of _prapatti_

io worldly life and the benefits arising therefrom, yet we can understand only from the _śāstra_s the relationship of cause and effect that exists between _prapatti_ performed with particular _mantra_s and in accordance with the instructions of the good_ācārya_ and certain special benefits which would result therefrom. Just as certain special forms of worship and service are prescribed for certain special benefits, _prapatti_, too, has been enjoined. If it were otherwise, no rules would have to be prescribed for the service of _Bhagavān_, in the same way as there are none for the service of the king. It would lead to the wrong view that, for _prapatti_ also, the initiation into _mantra_s with the instructions of good_ācārya_s is unnecessary. That even those who are not competent for the utterance of _mantra_s may perform _prapatti_ to the Saviour who has certain specific attributes and that certain specific benefits will be derived therefrom, provided it is performed in the proper way without anything wanting and without any up due excess - this cannot be determined by any sound inference, Therefore just as particular forms of worship and service to _Bhagavān_ are enjoined (in the _śāstra_s) with certain accessories, there is nothing inappropriate in the _śāstra_ prescribing the per formance of _prapatti_ with certain accessories (_aṅga_s ).

THE VIEW THAT _UPĀSANA_ OR _BHAKTI_ IS INCONSISTENT WITH ONE'S ESSEN

TIAL NATURE IS WRONG:

There are some who maintain that even among these _upāya_s which are enjoined by the _śāstra_s, upūsanas are opposed to the essential nature (of the _jīva_ ). This should be taken to mean only a desire to praise _prapatti_ with emphasis on it and not to condemn upāsanas ( as being against one's nature). The reasons are as follows:

(a) It cannot be said that they are against the essential nature of the jīve on the ground that they would destroy the self, for the self is eternal (and cannot be destroyed).

(b) It cannot be stated that the self or soul is, in its essential nature (_svarūpa_), incapable, as the Sankhya says, of being a doer, and is therefore incapable, by its very nature, of performing _upāsana_s. For the self is a doer in _bhakti_ (or upa. sanas) and the like is in the performance of _prapatti_, and in rendering service (to _Bhagavān_ and to Bhāgavatas). As stated in the _Brahma_ _Sūtra_s: "The 'Self is a doer (capable of endeavour or effort); otherwise the _śāstra_s which enjoin doing certain things and refraining from certain other things would have no purpose or aim", and again, “This "doership of the self is dependent on _Brahman_" As stated in these passages, the self is a doer capable of endeavour, though his being a doer is dependent on _Bhagavān_. If it is maintained that the self is absolutely incapable of action, it would follow that, since purposeful action is the sign or mark, of the existence of a thing, the self is void or non-existent. If it is held that the self merely exists and is without _jñāna_ (or knowledge), without the desire to act, and without the endeavour or effort needed for action, it would follow that it is incapable also of enjoyment (bhoktritvam). This would mean that _samsāra_ is illusory and that there is no need for any _upāya_ for the attainment of _mokṣa_. The _śloka_ "_Lakṣmī_" comes of her own accord to a man who makes no endeavour. Another man does not obtain even food, hard though he works. This is also due to past _karma_" - this _śloka_ should not be interpreted as stating that the _upāya_s prescribed in the _śāstra_s are all of no use. It only emphasises that certain benefits come to a man as a result of certain actions performed in previous (births).

(c) Nor can it be maintained that _upāsana_s are, according to _śāstra_s, against the essential nature of the _jīva_, because they would bring evil consequences. For, unlike actions performed out of the desire for worldly gains (kāmya) and actions prohibited in the _śāstra_s (nishiddha), which are obstacles to _mokṣa_ and which arise from desire (rāga) and the like, upāsanas cannot bind the soul to _samsāra_, because they are not performed out of a desire for worldly gains and because they are enjoined in the _śāstra_s only for those who want _mokṣa_.

Thus upāsanas cannot destroy the essential nature of the self, they are not impossible of performance nor do they bring evil consequences; there is, therefore, no justification for their being considered to be at variance with the essential nature (of the self).

(d) Again it may be argued that since the self is different from such things as the body, there is no propriety in the man who knows that, in his essential nature as the self, there is no such thing as _varṇa_ or _āśrama_, performing the duties and rites (_dharma_s) and other _upāya_s which are connected with them, because they all arise from the (erroneous) notion. "I am a Brahmin, I am a Kṣatriya." (It may be argued) on this ground that these rites and duties (_dharma_s) which are dependent on one's caste (_varṇa_) and _āśrama_ may justly be considered as being against the essential nature of the self. This argument, too, is not sound for the following reason :-- Even if he understands that, in its essential nature, the self is not Brahmin and the like, yet since he is, owing to certain forms of past _karma_, in close association with the body which has the attributes of Brahmin and the like, he should not give up the _dharma_s enjoined by the _śāstra_s in accordance with his _varṇa_ and _āśrama_ and also in accordance with his capacity for getting rid of the ills of life and for attaining good things, as long as he is with that body, in the same way as he makes endeavours to ward off such things as hunger and thirst which arise from that association with the body. Therefore it cannot be maintained that these _dharma_s should be given up on the ground that they are against the essential nature of the soul because the body is different from the soul to (the man endowed with discrimination.) In regard to the performance of these _dharma_s, it is not the delusion that the essential nature of the self has Brahminness and the like which gives competence, but the association with the body which has such attributes as Brahminness. Therefore we do not see any conflict between upāsanas and the essential nature of the self on account of the intelligent discrimination between the body and the soul which is necessary for the performance of all _dharma_. That upāsanas have within them the notion of "I" (ahamkara) finds no authority or sanction in the _śāstra_s, but was merely assumed by these critics to exist. (In the performance of _karma_ _yoga_, we are enjoined to give up the notion that we are free agents and that we want certain benefits ).

(e) Some say that since _karma_ _yoga_ and the like have to be performed with the help of the body and the senses which are adventitious (upādhi) and which were acquired as the result of past _karma_, they are against the essential nature of the self. To them we reply that, even for a knowledge of one's essential nature and for learning _Dvaya_ and the like, there is need for such things as the mind. (So they would have to say that knowledge of the essential nature and learning _Dvaya_ are against the essential nature.) Thus their objection would extend to the latter also.

THE OBJECTION THAT THE _JĪVA_ WHO IS ENTIRELY DEPENDENT ON THE LORD CANNOT AND SHOULD NOT ADOPT AN _UPĀYA_.

(f) It might be asked, “ Whatever that might be, since the _jīva_ exists solely for _Iśvara_ (_śeṣa_ ), he is not expected to protect himself and since he is absolutely subject to the will and control of _Iśvara_, be cannot protect himself; is it proper then to prescribe a means or _upāya_ as necessary to be adopted by him for his protection and to call this an _upāya_ that is capable of being adopted by him? Whea this is so, _bhakti_ _yoga_ and the like are productive of evil to the essential nature of the self (_svarūpa_); as they are inconsistent with his being a _śeṣa_ who exists only for _Iśvara_ and are not possible of adoption, as they are inconsistent with his being absolutely under the will and control of _Iśvara_". This objection has already been answered as leading to the logical conclusion of the possibility of salvation for all. If the Lord were to grant a _jīva_ _mukti_ or salvation without any consideration (_vyāja_) whatsoever, the _jīva_ should be a _mukta_ from beginning less time, If it is beld that _Iśvara_, being independent and omnipotent, makes a man a _mukta_ whenever He is pleased, it would mean that he is partial to some and cruel to others. Similar heresies would follow : Further those _śāstra_s which prescribe the means for attaining _mukti_ would become meaningless. Therefore in adopting this means enjoined as the result of the _jīva_'s being a _śeṣa_ there is appropriateness and also a like appropriateness in the owner protecting what is his own. It would become possible to adopt such means as are agreeable to Him with the help of the measure of independence granted (to us) by Him as the Supreme Controller and to expect His favour in regard to the fruit or object of attainment. This _śeṣa_tva or existing solely for the Lord and being absolutely subject to His will and control - these two will help, in the stage of realisation, to perform the kind of service that is agreeable to Him as that ordained by Him.

If these objectors hold that, on account of the knowledge of being the _śeṣa_ and of entire dependence on _Iśvara_, the _jīva_ should make no effort for his own protection, it would follow that the service (_kaiṅkarya_ ) rendered in accordance with the _śāstra_s for the attainment of the Lord's favour and so also _prapatti_ which is prescribed as possible, would he beyond his competence, because they are understood as being opposed to his essential nature. We have already stated that _prapatti_ is capable of being adopted as a means in as much as it has been prescribed in the words "saranam vraja" (seek refuge), as something that has to be performed over and above the mere knowledge of the relationship (between the _jīva_ and _Iśvara_ ) arising from the texts. Therefore there is no inappropriateness in the _jīva_, who exists only for the Lord and who is entirely subject to His control, adopting such means of his own for his protection as he is competent to adopt,



THE OBJECTION THAT THE RITES OF VARŅA AND _ĀŚRAMA_ AND _BHAKTI_ YOGA ARE INCONSISTENT WITH EXCLUSIVE DEVOTION TO THE LORD.

(g) However, it may be stated, since the _jīva_ has understood clearly that He exists solely for _Iśvara_ and for no other, it is opposed to his nature as a supreme and exclusive devotee of the Lord to practise the rites (_dharma_ ) ordained for his varṇa and _āśrama_, because they imply the mediatorship of other deities (like Agni, Surya and Varuna) and also to practise such things as _bhakti_ _yoga_ which have these rites as their _aṅga_ or accessory. It is only s'uddha yājis[Śuddha Yajis . Those whose adoration is solely to _Bhagavān_ without any intermediary like Agni, Varuna and the like.] who worship the Lord alone (without any reference to other deities) that deserve to be called men with supreme and exclusive devotion to the Lord (paramaikānti)". This objection can arise only from a lack of clear understanding of the conclusion arrived at in such treatises as _Śrī_ _Bhāṣya_. It may be asked how. The answer is that in such vidyās as Pratardana and Madhu _vidyā_, it is distinctly stated that the Supreme Being is to be worshipped or meditated upon by the aspirant for _mukti_ as having Indra and other deities as His body. The author of _Śrī_ _Bhāṣya_ has declared that in regard to the rites and duties of the _varṇa_ and _āśrama_ also, which are _aṅga_s or accessories to the vidyās, the object of worship or meditation is only the Supreme Self who has the respective deities as His body. Therefore what is opposed to exclusive devotion to the Lord is the worship of other deities as if they were independent, and also connection with other deities owing to a desire for certain specific fruits, when these deities have nothing to do with the rites and duties which are compulsory and recurrent (_nitya_ ) as well as those which are incidental and occasional (_naimittika_ ). There is no opposition to supreme and exclusive devotion to the Lord in performing one's ordained rites and duties without any attachment to or desire for any other fruit and with the thought that these deities are attributes of the Lord and that such words as Agni denote the Lord who has Agni and the like as His body or attributes. There is no opposition to exclusive devotion, likewise, in following the principle: "These words (Agni, Indra etc.) directly denote, by their etymological significance, the Supreme Self. It is not improper to think so. So says Jaimini", for these are rites and duties enjoined (in the _śāstra_s).

(h) "But", it may be argued again, "the _śāstra_s have enjoined also rites for such things as bewitchment ( abhichāra)[^69] to produce conviction. In the same manner, the forms of meditation (or _upāsana_ ) have been enjoined only in order to produce conviction or faith in the efficacy of what is prescribed (by the _śāstra_s) viz., _prapatti_. It does not mean that they are to be performed. To the aspirant for _mukti_, the end or object of attainment and the means of attaining it are both one and the same. Therefore the means favourable for the attainment of that end is only _Iśvara_, It is on account of this that the god presiding over _dharma_ condemned upāsanas as opposed to the end in view, while saying to his son :-"O, "Bharata, If you are afraid of sins, do not begin any activity and remain with the thought that Nārāyaṇa is the only end to be attained with all your heart." This argument too, is not tenable for the following reasons:

[^69]:
The Vedas prescribe the rites called abhichara for causing the death of one's enemy. They do so in order that by seeing the effect, men may have faith in the _śāstra_.


(1) The rites of bewitchment ( abhichāra) and the like are sources of evil, because they are performed for purposes or fruits that are evil. Since _bhakti_ or _upāsana_ is enjoined for attaining _mokṣa_, it cannot be a source of evil:



(2) It would be inconsistent with the view of these critics to hold that _bhakti_ or _upāsana_ is enjoined only to produce an eager desire for the adoption of an easier means, viz., _prapatti_, by describing a more difficult means, viz, _bhakti_, for they hold that _bhakti_ is no means at all (to attain _mokṣa_). Besides, _bhakti_ does not yield its fruit in this life but only after it. So it cannot create faith or conviction in the other means prescribed, viz., _prapatti_. Men generally adopt, of their own accord, the easier means in preference to the more difficult means. The success of the easier means in producing the desired result will create faith or conviction in regard to the more difficult means and not vice versa. So the more difficult _upāya_ cannot cause faith in the efficacy of the easier means. It will, therefore, have to be argued in support of their view that, when certain fruits or good results which will arise from a main rite or angī are stated to arise from its _aṅga_ or accessory rite, it should be considered only as arthavada or mere praise having no literal truth according to a principle (or nyāya) of the Mimamsakas. Here _mokṣa_ is really the fruit of _prapatti_, which is the angī and this fruit is, in the view of these critics, for the sake of mere praise (which is not true), assigned to its _aṅga_ _bhakti_ also. So, _bhakti_ is, according to them, really not capable of yielding _mokṣa_. This argument, too, is no good as it would be inconsistent with the contention of these critics, for they would then have to admit that _bhakti_ is an _aṅga_ or accessory of _prapatti_ (which they deny).

The means or _upāya_, that is favoured by _Iśvara_, who is the object of attainment, can be understood only from the _śāstra_ (and it is no use asserting that _bhakti_ is not favoured by Him). Reason is not competent to say that the means, viz., _bhakti_ is opposed to the end in view (_Bhagavān_). If we are to object to any one thing that is prescribed in the stāstras by reasoning which is against the _śāstra_, there would, by parity of reasoning, be no validity in any of the things or _dharma_s prescribed in the śāstras and, likewise, in the s'astras prescribing _prapatti_ as well.



Further there is no authority for the statement that in the _śloka_ quoted above (from _Viṣṇu_ _dharma_ :66-72), the word pātaka (sin) refers to upāsanas and the like. Therefore since _bhakti_ and _prapatti_ are both enjoined for the aspirant to _mukti_, they are, either of them, to be adopted in accordance with the competence (of the individual concerned).

(i) Nor would it be proper to hold that, though these two _bhakti_ and _prapatti_ are enjoined (in the _śāstra_s), _bhakti_ or _upāsana_ and the like are not to be practised in as much as they have not been favoured for adoption by the ācāryas; (for instance) such things as the slaying of a bull for the entertainment of a guest at dinner, though enjoined, are opposed to the traditional practice of the learned (siṣṭa). This objection, too, is not that of a thinking mind. It is only when all the _ācārya_s avoid the performance of a rite or observance, that it should be abandoned in accordance with the saying: "Though a ritead has been prescribed in the _śāstra_, yet if it will retard the attainment of _svarga_ and is also repugnant to the general public, it should not be performed". In regard to the rites in question, since they were adopted by such ancient_ācārya_s as Parāśara who is described by Alavandar as one of the best sages, it cannot be maintained that they are against the traditional observance of all learned men.

(j) In the same way, it cannot be argued that, “though these rites were suitable as _dharma_s to be practised in other yugas, since in Kali Yuga, it is not possible to find men competent to perform such things as the upusana or meditation of the Supreme Self, they are pot suited for observance in this age. That is why it has been said :-“Whatever fruit a nan obtained in Krita Yuga by renunciation (tyāga), whatever fruit a man obtained in the Dvāpara Yuga by the performance of yajnas, whatever a man obtained in Tretayuga by worshipping the Lord, that a man attains in Kali Yuga by the mere mention of His names", and so also in the Mahābhārata " Kali Yuga has this one great advantage, O, king; in Kali, a man gets rid of his past _karma_ by the mere mention of _Śrī_ Kṛṣṇa's names and attains the Lord": Against this objection we may state that even at the present time, there may be present men who are competent to perform such things as upāsanas and who, like the ancient _ācārya_s, are established in _yoga_ for its own sake, for it is said :-" To the * man who has Govinda at heart, there is Kritayuga in Kali yuga and to him who does not entertain Acyuta at heart, there is Kali Yuga even in Krita Yuga," If these were not admitted, it would follow that even _prapatti_, which is different from the mention of the Lord's names (samkārtana) is not to be performed, because it is difficult to find men who are competent to perform it and who have the intense faith (maha visvasa ) necessary for it, for it has been said :-“There is no man (O _Brahma_) who is competent to be initiated into this mantru. who is competent to perform the rite uttering this _mantra_ or who will listen to it." Therefore since there is no other objection to such things as upāsanas, they can be said to be unsuitable only for those adhikūrīs who are "destitute of all _upāya_s and who have no other way of salvation", because they are inappropriate for their competence in the same way as ablutions by complete immersion in water are unsuitable for those that are ill. It is in regard to such men as do not understand their being incompetent ( for _bhakti_ or _upāsana_ ) and who adopt it as a means that it is said: “It is owing to the weakness of mind which fails to understand its competence or incompetence that a man adopts _bhakti_ as an _upāya_. Therefore even these upāsanas and the like are, for other adhikārīs, suitable to the extent of their competence. Incompetence for them arises from inability to adopt them or the inability to endure delay (in attaining salvation). The man who has this incompetence adopts _prapatti_. The man who has adopted _prapatti_ as an independent and direct _upāya_ is proclaimed as "one who has  performed a sacrifice, one who has done what he ought to do' and 'one who has performed a hundred sacrifices' by the Alvars, the great sages and the Lord's _Śāstra_s ( Bhagavat Săstra) and the Vedas. Further these authorities also praise all his activities up to the time of death, as if they were the varied duties connected with yajnas and ending with the final bath (avabhrita). They hold also that, in the same way as the man who has performed a yajna performs the compulsory and occasional rites (_nitya_ and _naimittika_ ) after it, the man who has adopted _prapatti_ should perform the duties of his _varṇa_ and _āśrama_ as the commands of the Lord who is omnipotent and that the man who has performed the sacrifice or yajna of the self does not require the performance of any other activity for the fruit desired by him. Therefore as stated in such places as the _śloka_ :-"The Yogi is superior to all those who practise austerities (tapas); he is superior also to the jnănīs and to those who perform the rites and duties (ordained for them). Therefore, O Arjuna, become a yogin"; the _dharma_s or activities of renunciation are superior to the activities or _dharma_s of action (_pravṛtti_); so also the _yoga_ connected with the self is superior to all other yogas; of all yogas the highest is the _yoga_ connected with (_Śrī_ Kṛṣṇa), the son of _Vāsudeva_, for it has been said, "The man who fixes his mind on me and worships me with earnest faith should be considered as the highest among yogis". Similarly of all the _vidyā_s or forms of meditation on the Supreme Self, only the particular _vidyā_ which is called nyāsa, _nikṣepa_ and so on is the highest, for, among other reasons, it is easy, it has to be performed only once, and it leads to the attainment of the end soon. This truth regarding the _Nyāsa_ _vidyā_ is stated explicitly in the Bhagavat _Śāstra_ in the following _śloka_s: "Of all the austerities (tapas) prescribed for the attainment of _mokṣa_, the austerity called _nyāsa_ (_prapatti_) is the highest ", and "Those who, with their thoughts fixed only on _mokṣa_, are absorbed in the per

formance of karmayoga and those, again, who follow _jñāna_ _yoga_ aod _bhakti_yoga do not deserve to be placed on a par with even one-ten millionth of the man who has performed _prapatti_".

To the man who is unable (owing to illness ) to perform such things as ablution by immersion," the medita:ion on  _Viṣṇu_, which is called mental ablation, is ordained; thereby he obtains not only the purity of those who perform the other kinds of ablution, but acquires freedom from sins and the pleasure of the immediate enjoyment of _Bhagavān_. In the same way, though _prapatti_ is ordained for those who are not competent to perform such things as _upāsana_s, it confers the fruits attainable from them; it secures them (the _upāya_, namely, _upāsana_ also); it redeems the man who is destitute of all other _upāya_s ( _akiñcana_ ); and further it secures the fruit (desired by him) at the time when he wants it. Therefore _prapatti_ has superior potency.



DOES _PRAPATTI_ REQUIRE _AṅGA_S OR ACCESSORIES ?

So far we have removed the misconceptions that may arise about the competence for the _upāya_ and its essential nature (_svarūpa_). Henceforward we will proceed to remove those misconceptions that might be entertained in regard to accessories of that _upāya_. (1) Is it necessary that this _upāya_ should be accompanied by such things as the determination to do what is agreeable (ānukūlya _saṅkalpa_ )? Will the Saviour who said, “If a * man seeks protection with the desire for the immediate attainment of an object (arta ) or with endurance of delay in the attainment (dripta), he should be protected by those who know the _śāstra_s, even though he might be an enemy," "I will, in no circumstances, abandon one who has come to me in the guise of a friend, even though there are faults in him. The great will appreciate this," and "Bring him here, O Sugrīva, whether he be Vibhishana or even Ravana himself. I promise protection to him" - ( will the Saviour who said these words) and who was gracious even to his enemies care for the faults of those who have sought refuge under him? The ancients describe Him as the Protector of the whole world without any consideration of merit. Therefore these accessories (such as anukulya _saṅkalpa_) are not requisites but attributes that are most likely to be met with in those who have performed _prapatti_." Such is the contention of some critics. In reply to this misconception, it may be said that the passages on which it is based may really have, for their purport, the idea that though such attributes as anukulya do not continue after the performance of _prapatti_, some expiation will occur and there will be no diminution in the fruit of _prapatti_, (They do not mean that qualifications like _ānukūlyasaṅkalpa_ are not required at the time of the performance of _prapatti_). If this explanation is not accepted, many authoritative passages which distinguish between the main rite (_aṅgī_) and its accessories (_aṅga_) such as "_Śaraṇāgati_ is of six kinds," "_Nyāsa_ has five _aṅga_s" and "Let him perform that _prapatti_ which has five accessories " - many such authoritative passages would offer opposition. We have already stated that (the absence of these accessories) would be against what is the subject of experience in the world in regard to the conventions regarding the surrender of objects that have to be protected and that these accessories are required only once and so on. Even the divine missile, _Brahmāstra_, requires its own accessories (_aṅga_s). Hence the _śloka_ that there is no other requisite for _prapatti_ anywhere and at any time" only states that it does not require any other _dharma_ or rite. (It does not mean that even) the _aṅga_s of _prapatti_ are not required). Otherwise even intense faith (mahavisvasa) which these critics commend as an _aṅga_ might be considered as an attribute which may be found (in a _prapanna_) and not as an _aṅga_.



WHY SHOULD INTENSE FAITH BE CALLED AN

_AṅGA_ INSTEAD OF MERE FAITH ?

In this connection, some others may contend as follows:--- “When the believer has faith in what is stated in the _śāstra_s, what is the meaning of saying that there is something else called 'intense faith' or mahavisvasa? Therefore there is no point in bolding that this mahāvisvõsa is anything other than the faith in the _śāstra_ which is general and that it is a special _aṅga_ or accessory of _prapatti_. This contention (or objection) is refuted by the well-known fact that there are degrees of faith as stated in the _śloka_:"One should never place confidence in a man whom one does not trust. Even in a man whom one trusts, too much confidence should not be reposed." It is also refuted by the text which prescribes extra ordinary faith as an _aṅga_ or accessory (in regard to _prapatti_ ).

_Bhagavān_ Nārada  has declared in _Śrī_mad _aṣṭākṣara_ _Brahma_ _Vidyā_ that there are, in different men, varying degrees of faith in the _Mūlamantra_. (He says):- "In proportion to the degree of faith that a man has in _aṣṭākṣara_, will he attain the fruit thereof. It is impossible to measure its greatness." The Supreme Ruler of all will ultimately protect even those prapannas who are far from perfect and whose faith is not strong enough. If authority is asked for this statement, here it is :--"By the man who has once uttered the two syllables 'Harih' - by him steps have been taken for entering _mokṣa_". In accordance with this, Alavandar has conveyed the same idea in the _śloka_ :-- "Whoever' folds his hands in worship to Thee in any manner and at any time - his sins vanish at once. It generates all good things. It never fails to bear fruit," and so also, “A single" drop of the ocean of nectar called _bhakti_ towards the two lotuses of Thy feet will extinguish instantly the spreading wildfire called _samsāra_ and confer superior happiness". By uttering the three syllables "Govinda", Kshatrabandu, who stood surrounded by his past karmas swarming (like ants ), attained the highest state." As implied in these passages, _Iśvara_ will promote the perfection of the _upāya_ And protect the man. Has not this idea been conveyed by _Śrī_ Śāṇḍilya _Bhagavān_ to Devala in the following _śloka_ :- "Many of your previous births ended in vain. Consider how this life, too, may end in vain and perform _prapatti_? Froin the _śloka_ :-"The divine seers say that Thou art to be sought as the Saviour and that 'Thou protectest those who have sought Thy protection." -- (from this _śloka_) it should be understood that intense faith can be found (only) in the divine seers and not in ordinary men) and that, by the authority of what is said by the divine seers, those whose faith is not strong should strengthen it. Therefore since there are varying degrees of faith, what is stated in the _śāstra_ about intense faith being an _aṅga_ of _prapatti_ cannot be objected to.



CAUSES OF THE DECAY OF FAITH AND THE

REMEDY THEREFOR



We will now show how some people suffer from diminution of faith and state how this tendency can be corrected. Some may ask: - "How could _bhakti_ and _prapatti_ lead to such opposite results as worldly prosperity and _mokṣa_  merely because of the difference in the mental attitude (of those who adopt them)? Have we ever seen the same seed yielding two different fruits owing to the diversity of intentions in the (mind of the) sower? The answer to this question is as follows:- "The _śāstra_ which is the (sole) authority in regard to matters pertaining to it in the same way as sense perception (pratyaksha) is in regard to what pertains to it -- the _śāstra_ can certainly declare it to be so and reason has no right to attempt to disprove it. In worldly life, if we give an object to a charitable and generous king as an article for sale, we shall obtain a liberal return; but if it is given (without any thought of such return) merely as an offering or tribute, we see it produce whatever is desired (by the person).

These two _bhakti_ and _prapatti_, are of the nature of a rite prompted by _pravṛtti_ (activity prompted by worldly interests), when they are adopted by a person who expects some benefit other than (_mokṣa_) and in the case of those who desire only the feet of _Bhagavān_, they are of the nature of a rite of renunciation (_nivṛtti_). The same holds good of such things as the rites and duties which are compulsory and regularly recurrent and those which are compulsory and occasional (ritya and _naimittika_),

If it be asked whether üpasāna (_bhakti_) and _prapatti_, which are different in their nature since the former has to be repeated continuously (till death) and the latter to be performed only once -- whether these two could yield the same fruit; the answer is as follows:- "It is certainly possible, since it depends upon the competency of the person (adopting the _upāya_), as in worldly life and in the Vedic tradition.

To those aspirants to _mukti_ who have adopted _prapatti_ as an independent and direct means, the _upāya_ (means) and the end (which is) _mokṣa_, namely, the attainment of _Bhagavān_ are one and the same (i. e) _Bhagavān_. However, owing to the degree of urgency (tvarā) in the desire for _mokṣa_ which arises from the suffering of _samsāra_, there may be delay or absence of delay in the attainment of the fruit in accordance with the time when it is respectively desired by the persons concerned (viz.) ārta and dripta).

The reason why the Alvars, Nāthamuni and the like obtained such things as direct vision (sākshatkāra) of _Bhagavān_, while others who adopted _prapatti_ had to go without it is (two fold)--the difference in the desire for the fruit expressed at the time of _prapatti_ and also the difference in the past good _karma_ which had begun to operate in this life.



Though that part of the fruit formerly desired is certain owing to the performance of _prapatti_ on a single occasion, yet, if a person eagerly desires some other part of the fruit not desired before, a further _prapatti_ is also appropriate.

Some critics may entertain doubts in regard to the effectiveness of _prapatti_ which is the means of attaining all benefits without exception, when it is found that some forms of _prapatti_ intended to secure t_aṅgī_ble benefits in this life itself fail to do so. These critics should be made to understand that if there is no effect, it is due to some defect in the activity (_karma_), in the doer (karta) or in the means or accessories ( sadhana ), just as in the case of other rites prescribed in the _śāstra_s. (For instance, the śāstra says, “He who desires rain should perform a yajna with kariri (bamboo sprouts )". If the rain does not follow the yajna, it must be due to some defect in the performance of the _karma_, in the doer, or in the sacrificer or in the accessories or sadhanas employed in the sacrifice). Defect in the performance (of _prapatti_) consists in the lack of intense faith, (mahavisvasa ), and the like, Defect in the doer consists in the absence of competency prescribed for _prapatti_. Defect in the sadhanas or accessories is the absence of such things as the teaching of the wise which is essential for the performance of _prapatti_ in accordance with the _śāstra_s. When _prapatti_ is done without any of these defects, we see even the attainment of visible and (t_aṅgī_ble) fruits that have been desired as the result.

Yet others might contend as follows:-"Such sages as Vyāsa who are alike the expounders of all _śāstra_s including the _śāstra_ on _prapatti_ state:-- "After studying all the _śāstra_s and after frequent investigation of their meaning with the help of reason, this one truth alone becomes evident: Nārāyaṇa should always be meditated on," "Hari alone is fit to be meditated on always by people like you who are sāttvikas." " _Viṣṇu_ " is constantly to be meditated on. He should never be forgotten." When they have arrived at this conclusion, how could it be said that, by the performance of _prapatti_ on a single occasion, _mokṣa_ could be attained? The passage in the Gita which says :- " Those  who perform _prapatti_ to me alone, get over mayā which cannot be easily got over -- this passage and others like it refer to _prapatti_ which is an _aṅga_ or accessory to _bhakti_ (_upāsana_) or meditation, Similarly such texts as the _Carama_ _śloka_ should be considered as prescribing _prapatti_ with its accessories only as an _aṅga_ of _bhakti_". This contention of theirs is inappropriate. (For it has been said): " Those who are incapable of meditation (_upāsana_ or _bhakti_) and seek Thee as their _upāya_-even they cross over _samsāra_ and enter Thy abode, _Vaikuṇṭha_,” “Whatever object is desired, by whatsoever person and whatever cannot be obtained by other means, and that _mokṣa_ from which abode there is no return and which cannot be attained by _karma_ _yoga_, jñānayoga, or _bhakti_ _yoga_, all these fruits are obtained, O great sage, by those who respectively strive for them by the performance of _prapatti_. The Supreme Self is attained only thereby." As stated in these passages, if _prapatti_ adopted as a direct and independent _upāya_ is well established, the _prapanna_ acquires, as its reward, the capacity to meditate constantly on Nārāyaṇa as stated in _Śrī_ _Vaikuṇṭha_ _Gadya_. This is just like milk being a suitable drink for both the healthy man and the man who is in ill-health. Though meditation (_upāsana_ or _bhakti_) with its (Vedic) _aṅga_s is not within the competency of every one, yet it is not impossible for everyone to meditate on the Lord in such measure as is possible for one with his competency, as may be seen in the passage - "May 1, "as the result of Thy will, be endowed with the power of constantly meditating on Thee!" The author of _Śrī_ _Bhāṣya_, too, after teaching this _upāya_ (_prapatti_) in his smaller _Gadya_ (_Śrī_ R_aṅga_ _Gadya_) and in the longer _Gadya_ (_Śaraṇāgati_ _Gadya_) and referred to it briefly in the Vaikuṇṭhagadya, is pleased to teach this form of



meditation so that the desire for the end in view may gain in strength without suffering any diminution. He does so in the passage which begins as follows: "In order to that one may continue to live the life of the spirit, one should meditate in this manner,"



THE RITES _NITYA_ AND NAIMITTIKA ARE,

ON NO ACCOUNT TO BE GIVEN UP BY THE _PRAPANNA_:

The author of _Śrī_ _Bhāṣya_ has also described in his _Nitya_ the special form of worship (poojā) which is referred to in "I spent my time in studying the books which mention the attributes of the Lord, in listening to others reading them and in worshipping Him," (The description) begins (with the sentence):- "I will now explain the manner in which the man with exclusive devotion to _Bhagavān_ should perform the adoration (ārādhana) of the Lord, Having become a worshipper with supreme and exclusive devotion to Him and with a desire only to serve Him", he goes on to say, "Remain meditating (on the Lord) with a vision as clear as visual perception and with extreme love ( to Him)".

This service to the Lord which is the overflow of uninterrupted meditation and seeks no other interest or profit and which consists in five forms of service in the course of the day, is in accord with what is enjoined in the scripture of _Bhagavān_ (Bhagavat _Śāstra_ ) and with what has been prescribed by Vyāsa, Daksha and other great sages. It is also implicit in the following Tamil verses: "Giving up anger and deceit and controlling the senses, one should perform adoration five times in the day", as commented on by the ācāryas. "Approaching" the Lord in the morning (abhigamana), then proceeding to collect the materials required for his worship (upādāna); next performing the adoration (aradhana), afterwards uttering the sacred _mantra_s (japa); lastly meditating on the Supreme Lord (_dhyāna_); thas in the aforesaid five parts of the day, I will spend my days adoring Him with the good incense and flowers gathered by me with my own effort." Having heard, from the author of _Śrī_ _Bhāṣya_, this five-fold division of the day and what should be done in each, V_aṅgī_puram Nambi briefly summarised it in his _Nitya_ in the words quoted above. This may be seen also in the treatise on daily life written by Periajeer and others. Any differences that might appear in these descriptions are easily explained as due to differences found in different Samhitas.

Hence the _prapanna_ should spend his time in accordance with such _śāstra_ic scheme of life as has been taught by his_ācārya_ in rendering service to _Bhagavān_ with no other purpose than to please Him. (In this context the following passages may be borne in mind):- "I do not desire to go to the divine world leaving Thee; oor do I desire to enjoy immortality so also without Thee, I have no desire for the glory which comes of ruling the world". “ You will enjoy yourself with Sītā on the slopes of the mountains. I will render all service to you whether you are awake or asleep''. "I may be born to any one in whatever family; (wherever I may be born), may I have the eager longing to enjoy the pleasure of rendering service to Thee! I will never do anything on behalf of any other deity with my body, mind, speech or head". "The only object that I have in view is that the Lord should take me into His service for His own pleasure."

This daily worship of _Bhagavān_ consisting of abhigamana (approach) (and the four other duties) should not be done for the sake of such things as vanity, gain or honours as done by up believers; nor should it be done for the sake of any other object in

view (than pleasing _Bhagavān_, as may be done by those who have no knowledge of the truth and have not yet acquired freedom from the desire for worldly pleasures (vairāgya) and other such virtues. Without any desire even for the attainment of _mokṣa_ as by those who adopt _bhakti_ _yoga_ but have not completed it, if this mode of worship is performed with the sole desire of doing what is agreeable to the Lord for its own sake, as it is done by those who have already attained _mukti_, this abhigamana (approach) and other things will shield the _prapanna_ from the approach to other deities (abhigamana), from activities for the sake of other interests (upadana), from yajnas to other deities, from words about other (deities ) and from meditation (_dhyāna_ ) of the other deities.

Perialwar has pointed out that there will be no approach to other deities (abhigamana) in the following verse - "Now to that I have the austerity (tapas) of rendering service to Thee, it would be a detraction from Thy glory, if I were hereafter to stand with bowed head in front of the house of any other. Kindly note", He has also pointed out that there will be no activity for securing other things (upādāna) in the verge :-- "I will not so beg of Thee food for eating or cloth for wear." That there will be no yajna or sacrifice to others is brought out in passages like these :- "She will never adore any deity other than _Bhagavān_ even in her thoughts”, “Who else merits our flowers and our adoration than our Lord ?" "(The worship of other deities than _Bhagavān_) is like washing a wooden doll when ones' mother is at hand to be served", and "O men" of the world who neglect _Bhagavān_ and worship _jīva_s as if they were deities! Are you washing a wooden doll with warm water when similar service can and should be rendered to the mothers that gave you birth? Are you without the grace of the Lord tbat you cannot render service to Him ?." In the discourse of the seven sages also, it has been declared thus :



“He who has stolen the[^70] bulb of the lotus - let him worship other deities than _Viṣṇu_, who does good to Brahmins, who exercises control over the gods, who is worshipped by all those who live in the three worlds, who is the cause of the creation, the maintenance, and the destruction of the three worlds, who is under the control of no one else, who is the support of the world and who both creates and destroys the world, and who is the _guru_ of the world," and again, “He who has stolen the bulb of the lotus - he is one who never performs those _dharma_s which please the Lord, who never favours them, and who is of such a nature that he practises evil _dharma_s and evil rites." That the _prapanna_ will never utter the praise of others is declared in verses like the following:--Tiruvoymozhi 3-9 and also in: "The mouth will never sing the praise of any one other than the Lord.” So also that the _prapanna_ will never think of others is declared in the following passages :-"My thoughts are never with any deity other than the Lord. _Bhagavān_ who helps the gods is aware of this." and "I will never think that there are other deities that I want to attain and that will come to me."

[^70]:
During a famine, seven sages obtained the bulb of a lotus for food and went out for their bath. Indra stole it and hid it. When the sages returned and found it missing, each of them had to swear in these words to prove that he had not stolen it.


(Our ancient seers) have declared that even those who are not competent to perform this five-fold scheme of adoration may not fail to render this service or _kaiṅkarya_, if they will perform such compulsory and occasional rites as they are competent for, if they sing the praise of the Lord and the like and if they render service to such persons as have the competency to perform that adoration and as have exclusive devotion to the Lord in accordance with their competence and in perfect dependence on them. And this may be seen in the following passages :-“The adoration of _Viṣṇu_ is

superior to all other adorations. The adoration of Viṣṇu's devotee, which is different from it, is said to be superior even to that "; "Satagopan" is ever in the company of the servants of _Bhagavān_ who saved Gokula with the hill (as an umbrella)" and "The tapas of those who are attached to the devotees of the Lord will surpass that of (even) those who sing the praise of the Lord." The joy of those who render this service and of those who look with delight on this service rendered by them is of the same nature as that of _Iśvara_, who alone is competent to rule over the affairs of the world (jagad vyāpāra) and of those who have already attained _mukti_ and merely look on. There is nothing inappropriate in this joy being the same in the case of those who perform the service and of those who look on it with delight, for it is just like the purifying influence described in the following _śloka_ :-"To hear of the performance of _dharma_ ( done by others), to see it, to think of it, to speak of it and to find delight in it - all these, O best of kings, purify always the person doing so."

So also it is said in the Mahābhārata :-"Therefore a Śūdra should not utter my names with the _praṇava_ (the syllable Om), and in the Nāradiyakalpa "The japa of the ashtakshara has been prescribed, for women and for Śūdras to be performed without the dative suffix thus:- (namonārayana). Similarly there are no rules for them about the svara, about _praṇava_ and about touching the limbs (_aṅga_nyāsa ). It is declared in the _śāstra_s that for women and for Śūdras, japa consists in the mere utterance of the _mantra_ (without them)". In the Varāhapurāṇam, it is said, “The man born of the caste of those who eat dog's flesh woke up as soon as the day dawned, finished his obser. vance which consisted in singing the praise of _Bhagavān_ and returned after uttering the _mantra_ "Namo Nārāyaṇa". So also we find the following :- " If a man goes to _Vaikuṇṭha_ uttering the mūlamantra, 'Namo Nārana' with his hands folded in reverence over his head, he will never return to the world of _samsāra_ etc , and “If one is "to utter the name of _Bhagavān_, one should say "_namo_ Narana". The middle of the sugar.cane (i.e.) _aṣṭākṣara_ with eight joints becomes suitable to everyone, if the root and the top (i.e.) the first and the last syllable are cut off. So also there is nothing inappropriate in all prapannas enjoying the delight (rasa) of thinking of _Bhagavān_ at any time whatever. It is only for _bhakti_ _yoga_, which has its _aṅga_s or accessories and which is different from _prapatti_, that some are not competent. Even though _prapatti_ becomes perfect by the rite which lasts only for a moment (we are taught) thus by the Saviour: "Always utter the dvaya with the thought of its meaning (in your mind)". Therefore the command "Nārāyaṇa is to be meditated on always" should be taken as an _upāya_ for some (viz. those who adopt _bhakti_) and as the fruit for others, (namely prapannas). Thus the command is in no way opposed to _prapatti_ adopted as a direct and independent means.

_Śrī_ _Rāmānuja_ has explained in such treatises as _Śrī_ _Bhāṣya_ how _prapatti_ is an _aṅga_ to _bhakti_ or _upāsana_. In the _Gadya_ he explains how _prapatti_ can also be an independent and direct means. It is true we find the following :-"There is nothing other than _yoga_ which can destroy such evil traits as ignorance (a_vidyā_) (and conceit)” and, “Past karmas cannot be destroyed even in ten thousand births without _yoga_. Only the fire of _yoga_ can consume away the dry grass of _karma_." But since _prapatti_ has been enjoined as a direct and independent means, on the strength of that ordinance, the passages cited above (on _yoga_) should be considered as applicable only to those others who are competent for them.

Similarly answers to other misconceptions that might arise in regard to sūdhyopāya (_bhakti_ and _prapatti_) may be found in _Nikṣepa_ raksha. _Sādhyopāya_ as clarified in this chapter should be borne in mind in regard to the three mysteries (_mantra_s) in the appropriate place.

TAMIL VERSE:

वरिक्किण्ड्रनन् परन् यावरैयॆन्नु मऱैयदनिल्  
विरिक्किण्ड्रदुङ्गुऱियॊण्ड्राल् विनैयरैयादलिनाम्  
उरैक्किण्ड्र नन्नॆऱियोरुम्बडिगळिलोर्न्दुलगम्  
तरिक्किण्ड्र तारगनार् तगवाऱ्‌ ऱरिक्किण्ड्रनमे. ( 35 )

The _Śruti_ states at length that the Supreme Being chooses those who should win His grace; but this choice (of the _jīva_ bound by _karma_ for the bestowal of His grace) is based on some consideration. Therefore we obtain redemption by the mercy of the Lord who, as antaryāmī, supports the world and, as Saviour, helps us cross the sea of _samsāra_ and by understanding clearly the good paths for winning His grace (_bhakti_ and _prapatti_) as described in the śāstras.



SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_:



तत्तद्धैतुकहेतुके कृतधियस्तर्केन्द्रजालक्रमे  
बिभ्राणाः कथकप्रधानगणने निष्ठां कनिष्ठाश्रयाम् ।  
अध्यात्मश्रुतिसंप्रदायकतकैरद्धा विशुद्धाशया-

स्सिद्धोपायवशीक्रियामिति हि नस्साद्ध्यां समध्यापयन् ॥ ५४ ॥

Those (great men) who were well-versed in the dialectical methods of rationalists which resemble the art of conjuring, who stand first like the little finger while counting men renowned in argument and whose thoughts have been rendered clear by the soap-nut of the Upaniṣads and the tradition that has followed therefrom-- (those great men) have taught us, in the manner described in this chapter, that _Sādhyopāya_ (_bhakti_ and _prapatti_) are the means of securing the favour of _Siddhopāya_ (namely

BHAGAVĀN ).

इति श्रीकवितार्किकसिंहस्य सर्वतन्त्रस्वतन्त्रस्य श्रीमद्वेङ्कटनाथस्य वेदान्ताचार्यस्य कृतिषु  
श्रीमद्रहस्यत्रयसारे साध्योपायशोधनाधिकारः चतुर्विंशः ॥  
श्रीमते निगमान्तमहादेशिकाय नमः ॥







+१ अर्थानुशासन-विभागः  
१ अर्थानुशासन-विभागः





