+++
title = "07"

+++
In the seventh chapter, the text presents deśādhva, the path of space. It consists of objects of multifarious forms made manifest by the Lord by means of His power of activity. The form of any of these objects, such as house, courtyard, market, temple, garden, or forest, which are different from one another, shines to a limited subject only as being mutually distinct from one another, and also from the subject himself. To the Lord, who is perfect and there fore free from all limitations, all subjects and objects shine as his very Self. In reality, these forms have their substratum in pure consciousness, and so they shine nondifferently from it. In its free will, consciousness (saṁvid) veils its pure nature and manifests before the view of the limited subject as sūnya, prāṇa, and buddhi, and from this the embodied soul sees pictures of objects as distinct from the experiencing subject. Thus, sūnya, prāṇa, and buddhi shine externally as objects, but really they are not different from the Self. 

The adhvas have their locations in sūnya, prāṇa, in all the nādi cakras, and in the body itself. As they proceeded from con sciousness, they are to be dissolved into it by involutionary meth ods. As the adhvas are vast, it is practically impossible, even for a yogin, to do so in an eon of ages. 

Therefore, one should know, first of all, the real nature of these adhvas. They have their real resting place in consciousness, and through it sarvid, the entire adhva (consisting of the void, the intellect, the vital energy, and everything), whether it abides in the body, the image of a deity, or the sacrificial altar, becomes complete. When the aspirant is able to realize this, he dissolves them into Brahmā, the Lord of Brahmanda; then, the tattvas from 

INTRODUCTION 19 

purusa to kalā are dissolved into Viṣnu, who is their Lord; then, māyā, the knot (granthi) into Rudra, upon which māyā is to be dissolved into Isvara, who is its Lord; then, śuddhavidyā should be dissolved in Sadāśiva, and Anasrita śiva is to be dissolved in śakti and śiva; and finally all of them are dissolved into Parāśiva, the all-pervading One. 

The Tantric text called Trisira Bhairava presents pure con sciousness as if it were a tree, consisting of three portions. The extreme fringe, the root, is known as bodhamūla, where “this ness" is predominant; it is the gross form of bodha (conscious ness). The middle portion of that tree is not predominantly dual in nature because, though it shines as "this-ness." here, it has merged with consciousness. The most perfect is bodha, the uppermost part of that tree, where there is no separate existence. This state is known as bodhāgra, the highest consciousness, where everything has its existence without any separate distinction but shines non differently from pure consciousness. 

From this, it is evident that all the adhvas, consisting of thirty six tattvas, are not different from Parāśiva, the Supreme. One who is able to realize the most delightful adhvas as nondifferent from his own consciousness can attain śivahood without delay. 

This chapter gives a detailed account of all the tattvas from the earth onward, and the bhuvanas contained in each. 
