+++
title = "08"

+++
In the previous chapter we saw that worlds (bhuvanas) are the expansion of śakti, which keep all the multifarious forms of sub jects and their objects of experience within herself. Permeating them all is the highest universal, known as Parāmaśiva, who remains ever shining. That which is less pervasive than the high est universal, present in some bhuvanas but absent in others, is defined as a tattva; for example, solidity, firmness, and grossness are all qualities found in Brahmānda alone. 

The next discussion in this chapter is the relationship of cause20 TANTRASĀRA 

and effect (kāryakaranabhāva). According to this system, the relation is of two kinds, namely, the transcendent (pāramārthika) and the artificial or fictional (kalpita). The transcendent relation is such that, because of the Lord's freedom of will, because He is a free agent, everything beginning with śiva and ending in the earth shines nondifferently from Him and rests in Him. The artificial relation of the cause and the effect, however, is such that every thing follows a regular sequence. The relation of cause and effect is created by His power of niyati. According to this system, the rod, the wheel, and clay, considered essential for producing a jar, are only expedients. The real cause is the Lord, for He remains associated with all of them as the cause and the effect. In order to support this view, it is stated that it is He who brings all the causes together and sets them apart. The impelling force of universal consciousness is considered to be the real agent of everything. When the potter makes a jar, he himself is one with that universal consciousness who is the real doer. 

Parāśiva is perfect and full with His five Śaktis. These śaktis are inseparably united with their Lord and are manifested in five aspects by His free will. These five are: cit, ānanda, icchā, jñana, and kriyā. The five principles, namely śiva, śakti, sadāśiva, īśvara, and śuddhavidyā, are the manifestations of the śaktis men tioned above. It should be noted here that śakti is one and affluent with all the śaktis, but due to the dominance of one over the other, distinctions are also observed among them. For example, in śiva tattva, consciousness (cit) is predominant; when ānanda becomes dominant, it is called śakti tattva. The lords of the five pure prin ciples are Śiva, Śakti, Sadāśiva, īśvara, and Ananta. These five beginning with śiva and ending in Ananta have their respective ganas or hosts. They are named śāmbhava, śākta, mantreśvara, and mantra. This is known as pure path or adhva. 

The impure adhva is created by the will of the Lord for ful filling the desires of limited souls. Aghora is the creator of the impure adhva by causing agitation (kṣobha) in māyā. 

INTRODUCTION 21 

The principle called māyā is the material cause of the insen tient universe. It should be remembered in this context that the māyā śakti, belonging to the Lord, is that which manifests māyā the material cause, and is quite different from māyā, the principle or tattva. The entire universe is born of māyā tattva, from which kalā is born. It, in turn, is responsible for the rise of limited power of action in the limited soul. Māyā veils the pure conscious state of the self for which it loses its power of knowledge and activity. 

Kalā, though born of māyā tattva and being impelled by its force, becomes attached to the limited soul. These two, that is, kalā and aṇu, remain firmly attached to each other, so they cannot be easily differentiated. Those who remain under the influence of māyā tattva fail to get release so long as they do not receive grace from Ananta, the Lord of māyā tattva. Only then can puruṣas differentiate themselves from māyā, and as a result they become vijñānākala souls. Similarly, when one realizes his distinction from prakrti, he never goes below prakrti; and when one realizes one's distinction from kalā, one doesn't go beyond kalā tattva. When the residual trace of the malas become totally absent from the soul, he becomes one with śiva. 

It is to be remembered in this connection that the kalā tattva is the giver of limited activity to the limited soul. The impure vidyā bestows on the insentient subject a limited cognitive power. Only because of its presence is the limited subject able to see the real 

e intellect, and distinguish happiness and others from the mass of objects which are reflected in the mirror of buddhi. "I know something” and “I do something” are the forms of judgment aroused by vidyā and kalā, respectively. 

These rāga, vidyā, kalā, kāla, and niyati are of two types; because of grace, they are considered pure and therefore function as means for the attainment of śivahood. Kalā tattva becomes pure when it consists of activities like worshipping, etc., rāga tat tva becomes so when it gives rise to attachment to the Lord. Vidya becomes pure when it causes discernment regarding the Lord. In 

22 TANTRASĀRA 

the same way, kāla provides potency to the teachings regarding the Lord (tadupadeśādi viṇayameva kalanam), while niyati sup ports the soul in remaining steadfast in His worship. 

The group of kalā and other tattvas are different according to the difference of the individual souls, for the activity in them is seen to rise differently in different limited subjects. 

It is noteworthy that the agenthood with the characteristic of limited nature gives rise to pradhana, the equilibrium of the three guṇas, i.e., sattva, rajas, and tamas. The supreme Subject in the beginning is made limited by māyā, which takes away all of His glory. He is bestowed again with a little of His glory by means of kalā tattva and so on. Thus, He becomes a pasu, a limited subject, and the māyā, kāla, rāga, vidya, niyati, kalā tattvas serve Him as veils (kañcukas). 

The author further points out that prakrti is of two kinds. One is the equilibrium of the gunas; the other is guna tattva itself which, being disturbed by the predominant Lord of the tattva, causes agitation (kṣobha) in praksti, which in turn gives rise to the principle of buddhi. Prakrti should be accepted as the recipient of the agitation, otherwise it would not be possible for the liberated soul to remain uninvolved in bondage. According to this system, the disturbance (ksobha) in prakrti is caused by the Lord Himself. 

Ahamkāra arises from buddhi, which sees the light of puruṣa as if in a mirror that has become slightly impure, and because of its contact with objects it makes one experience “I know this" and "I do this." Thus it feels identity with the object and thinks of itself as "I." Buddhi receives the reflection of objects and at the same time, though insentient, manifests the light of puruṣa. From ahamkāra that is predominantly sattvika in nature come the five inner and external sense organs, from rajasa ahamkāra arises manas, and from the tamasa nature of ahamkāra the five tanmātras are born. Thus the tanmatras give rise to five gross elements: ether (nabhas), air (vāyu), fire (tejas), water (apa), and earth (prthvī). 

This chapter discusses all thirty-six principles, which are mutu 

INTRODUCTION 23 

ally related to one another. These are classified in a threefold divi sion consisting of nara, Śakti, and śiva. Śiva pervades all by His characteristic nature of luminous consciousness. The principle in which this characteristic of light is more prominent is considered more extensive than the other. For example, śiva is more extensive than śakti, while the latter is more so than nara. 
