+++
title = "09"

+++
This chapter classifies all the tattvas grouped under fifteen aspects as viewed by the seven kinds of knowing subjects: śiva, mantramaheśvara; mantreśvara, mantra, vijñānākala, pralaya kala, and sakala. These subjects each possess one of seven śaktis; thus counting the śaktis and the possessors of these śaktis, the number becomes fourteen. Including svarūpa, which refers to the "object in itself," with these fourteen, each of the tattvas from prthvī to prakrti has fifteen aspects. 

The Lord possesses three śaktis in the form of the goddesses as parā, parāparā, and āparā parā. The transcendent śakti func tions as the subject (pramātā). She is parā śakti, who is insep arably united with the supreme Subject. The goddess parāparā śakti is the instrument (pramāna), and āparā śakti operates as the object of experience (prameya). 

The earth and other tattvas have their distinctive svarūpa; that is, they are objects in themselves. In other words, the tattvas from praksti down to the earth shine as objects without having the reflection of any of the limiting adjuncts of the subject and its instruments. This is said to be the pure nature of each object; its existence does not rest in the subject. The object has its rest in itself, meaning that it exists independently of the limits of ord nary sense perception. 

It should be noted in this context that the object as such shines in this distinctive way by the grace of aparā śakti. The pure objec tive aspect of all the tattvas from the earth to prakrti broadly comes under the nara group, the basic concept of Trika as charac 

24 TANTRASĀRA 

terized by nara, śakti, and śiva. When śaktis related to different subjects become predominant, however, and the object in its turn rests in them, this is known as its śākta form. It shines thus by the grace of parāparā śakti. These śākta forms are seven, because the numbers of śaktis related to the different subjects are seven in number; but when the subject possessing these śaktis becomes predominant and the objects rest in the knowing subjects, it is known to be of the form of śiva, who is the possessor of the śaktis (śaktimān). They shine thus by the grace of parā śakti. The subject characterized as possessing a particular śakti, that is, a śaktimān, is of seven kindṣ. 

The first of these seven subjects, known as sakala, has vidyā and kalã as its śaktis, but they lie dormant in pralayākala souls, and though they are abiding in vijñānākala, it is as if they are disappearing. In the subject known as mantra, vidya and kalā function as pure knowledge (suddhvidyā), about to become awake, but the residual trace of it is still there. Mantreśa knowing subject is free from the above residual traces and śuddhavidyā has awak ened fully in them. This very śuddhavidyā is going to become icchāśakti in mantramahesvara, while in śiva it becomes fully manifest icchā with the characteristic of svatantryaśakti. 

The whole scheme may be presented by the following chart: 

(1) Prameya 

(2) Pramāna Vidyā/Kalā 

(i) Prthivi to Praksti 

Svarūpa = 1 7+7+1=15 

(3) Pramātā (a) Sakala (b) Pralayakala (c) Vijñānākala (d) Mantra (e) Mantresa (f) Mantramahesa (g) śiva 

(ii) Puruṣa to Kalā 

Vidy, and 

Kalā are dormant. (a) Pralayākala 

(b) Vijñānākala 

INTRODUCTION 25 

Svarūpa = 1 

6+6+1=13 (iii) Pralayākala 

Svarūpa = 1 

5+5+1=11. (iv). Vijñānākala 

(c) Mantra (d) Mantreśa (e) Mantramahesa 

(f) Śiva Māṇa is without 

object. 

(a) Vijñānākala (b) Mantra (c) Mantreśa (d) Mantramahesa 

(e) Śiva pramāṇa is about : 

to disappear (a) Mantra 

(b) Mantresa (c) Mantramahesa 

(d) Śiva Suddhavidyā (a) Mantreśa 

(b) Mantramahesa 

(c) Śiva Awakened 

(a) Mantramahesa Suddhavidyā (b) śiva 

Svarūpa = 1 

4+4+1=9 

(v) Mantra Svarūpa = 1 3+3+1=7 (vi) Mantresa Svarūpa = 1 2+2+1=5 (vii) Mantramahesa Svarūpa = 1 1+1+1=3 (viii) śiva 

Iccha 

(a) Śiva (b) śakti 

Svarūpa = Svātantrya 

It has been stated before that the universe is characterized by the three: nara, śakti, and śiva. The aspect known as svarūpa is the sentient object in which objectivity is predominant and where the subjectivity of consciousness is totally absent. śiva is of the characteristic of pure consciousness; He is the supreme Subject (parāpramātā). His śakti, which shines as icchā, jñāna, and kriyā, manifests herself as six knowing subjects (pramātās). Of the six, the first three, mantramaheśvara, mantreśvara, and man 

26 TANTRASĀRA 

tra, do not have any objects, so therefore are known as pure sub jects (śuddha grahaka), but vijñānākala, pralayakala, and sakala are considered as impure subjects. 

The author shows, as an example, how the earth principle (prthvi tattva) shines in relation to pramātā and prameyas. The light that shines nondifferently from the Earth (dhara) is śiva. He supports his view by quoting the śruti Dharāmantramaheśvara: being impelled by the will of śiva leads to dharāmantreśa for bestowing siddhis on those who are desirous of it, and who are connected with dharā. Mantras are the vācakas of the super intending. deities of different bhuvanas under prthivi tattva, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the non-Saiva.doc trines. He remains as pralayākala knowing subject abiding in the earth principle (dharapralayakevali) and will have his egoism abide in dharā.. 

Then, the author shows how all the tattvas abide as prāṇa śakti, related to the knowing subject (pramātā). One single prāṇa, con sisting of sixteen tuṭis, extends until the emergence of the (vedya), the thing to be known. Among the sixteen tuṭis, the first is the undifferentiated one, the second is the one that manifests the gra haka, the last tuṭi is inseparable from the object, and the one pre ceding the last has the form of a fully manifest grahaka. Thus, twelve tuṭis out of sixteen are divided broadly into two divisions. The first six are of the nature of nirvikalpaka and the next six are the characteristic of parāparā, from where vikalpa begins to rise. 

All the subjects from mantramaheśvara down to sakala shine along the twelve tuṭis, two for each subject, while the first tuti, it should be remembered, is the location for śakti. 

The fifteen aspects with their varied distinctions are observed in two tuṭis each. Just as in the cognition of a jar, the character istics of the fifteen aspects can be watched, in the same way, this is observed in the vital energy when it is engaged in grasping any object. It has been hinted earlier that when a knowing subject, such as a sakala, does not participate as a subject-that is, when it is taken as a svarūpa-the aspect of fifteen becomes thirteen. 

INTRODUCTION 27 

. 

Thus, the number of aspects diminishes gradually by twos. Then finally, as distinction disappears, the number of tuṭis diminishes. At last, the yogin is able to attain absorption in śiva. Here, the time unit consists of two tuṭis-the first tuti is considered as being full, and the other has the character of śiva-śakti. It has been stated in the Tantrāloka that one who is able to absorb oneself in the second tuṭi is sure to attain the power of omniscience. 

Now the author explains the nature of states known as waking, dreaming, deep sleep, the fourth (turya), and beyond the fourth (turyātīta). All subjects, along with their śaktis, are knowers of the objects of all the tattvas. These states are the manifestations of consciousness conditioned by knowables (prameyas)The prameya state is said to be the chief characteristic of the waking state (jāgrat), otherwise known as (addhistheya), the locus. . 

In the Mālinīvijaya it is known as piṇḍastha, for the yogin, taking his stand on dharā and others as the base, is able to iden tify himself with them. But to the jñānin who is well advanced in meditation, it is known as sarvatobhadra, for to him, the jāgrat state is one which fully pervades the objects of experience. Tech nically, the waking state is the object of experience (prameya) or adhiṣtheya, the base, while the dreaming state (svāpna) is known as pramāṇa or adhisthana, and adhiṣthātā or the subject is the pramātā in deep sleep (sușupti). 

All the states have subdivisions of their own: (1) jāgrat-jāgrat, jāgrat-svapna, jāgrat-suṣupti, and jāgrat-turya; (2) svapna-jāgrat, svapna-svapna, svapna-sușupti, and svapna-turya; and (3) sus upti-jāgrat, suṣupti-svapna, sușupti-sușupti, and suṣupti-turya. 

Jāgrat is known to have four portions. The object that is expe rienced is abuddha, insentient, and the instrument of experience is called buddha; right knowledge, born from instrumentality, is known as prabuddha and suprabuddha. Of these two, prabuddha is of the nature of buddhi, while suprabuddha is free from impuri ties of the object of experience and therefore is of the character istic of resting in the self. This chart may be of some help for the understanding of the scheme: 

28 TANTRASĀRA 

1 

3 

Prameya Jagrat piṇḍastha Sarvatobhadra 

2 Pramāna Svapna Padastha Vyapti 

Pramātā Sușupti Rūpastha Mahāvyāpti 

Pramiti Turya Rūpātīta Pracaya 

T U R Υ Α Τ Ι Τ Α М А Н А Р В А С А Т А 

Piṇdastha may be explained as that which abides in the body. The abode of all paths (adhvas) is the vital energy (praṇa) and intention/thought (saṁkalpa). Everything lies in the vital energy and saṇkalpa, hence it is known as abiding there, and therefore it is also known as padastha. Rupayati is the one that gives form to the respective objects, and then withdraws them into the Self, which is none other than the atman. The Self, where they abide, is identical with the object. This identification and merger is known as rūpastha, but the form which is beyond all these is called rūpātīta. To the jñānin, svapna, whose nature is vikalpika, is con sidered to be vyāpti, for his jñāna is then free from external con ditions, and he is the active agent in changing and arranging the order of his thoughts. In the state of deep sleep, the jñānin feels freedom from limitations, therefore, it is considered as mahāv yapti. The jñānin in the turya state sees the universe collected together like an amalaka fruit in the palm of his hand; therefore, the name is pracaya. 

Jāgrat is the state which a sakala knowing subject enjoys, while svapna is enjoyed by a pralayakala, and suṣupti by a vijñā nākala subject. Mantra and mantramaheśvara subjects have their abode in the turya level, but in the turyātīta state, all beings, whether they are prameyas or pramātās, become one with śiva śakti and shine nondifferently with it. 

The fifteen aspects mentioned above are also observed in five states known as jāgrat, etc., thus: 

INTRODUCTION 29 

(1) 

From dhara to praksti 

(a) Svarūpa-Sakala-śakti (b) Pralayākala (c) Vijñānākala (d) Mantra and others (e) Śiva-śakti 

Jāgrat svapna suṣupti 

turya turyatita 

From Purusa 

to Māyā 

(a) Sakala 

(b) Prālyakala: :(c) Vijñānākala. 

(d) Mantra and others (e) śiva-śakti 

Jāgrat svapna suṣupti turya turyātīta 

(3) 

Māyā 

Jāgrat svapna suṣupti 

(a) Pralayakala (b) Vijñānākala (c) Mantra (d) Mantreśvara 

Mantramahesvara (e) Śiva-Śakti 

turya turyātīta 

(4) 

Above Māyā 

(a) Vijñānākala (b) Mantra (c) Mantraśvara (d) Mantramaheśvara (e) Śiva-Śakti 

Jāgrat svapna suṣupti turya turyātīta 

(5) 

Suddhavidyā 

(a) Mantra (b) Mantreśvara (c) Mantramahesvara (d) śakti (e) śiva 

Jāgrat svapna sușupti turya turyātīta30 TANTRASĀRA 

(6) 

Īsvara 

(a) Mantresa (b) Mantramaheśaśakti (c) Mantreśa (d) śakti (e) śiva 

Jāgrat svapna suṣupti turya turiyātīta 

(7) 

Sadaśiva 

(a) Mantramaheśvara (b) Kriyāśakti (c) Jñānaśaktis (d) Icchāśakti (e). śiva 

Jāgrat svapna suṣupti turya 

(8) 

Undifferentiated 

stage 

(a) kriyā (b) Jñana (c) Iccha (d) Ānanda 

Jāgrat svapna suṣupti turya turyātīta 

(e) Cit 
