+++
title = "11"

+++
This chapter discusses śaktipāta, but before giving a detailed account of it, the text deals with issues concerning the occurrence of the descent of grace in a particular individual. This has been dealt with in detail in our translation of the text and the additional: notes. The author presents and critiques three standard views regarding śaktipāta: (1) bondage, or saṁsāra, has ignorance as its root. When the rise of right knowledge occurs, the descent of grace also comes into being. This view has been refuted by the author. (2) Next, the view known as karmasāmya, that is, the bal ance of two opposing actions, is summarized. According to this theory, when karmasāmya occurs, śaktipāta is sure to take place. The author does not accept this view either. (3) The third view considers the ripening of mala (mala paripaka) as the cause of Śaktipāta, which is also rejected by the author. 

According to Abhinavagupta, these views may be acceptable to the followers of dualist philosophies, but according to the non dual system known as Parameśvarādvayavāda (known to modern scholarship as Kashmir Saivism), they are not tenable. According to this system, the Great Lord, in the course of His play, veils His true nature and assumes a limited nature. When the concealment of His pure nature disappears, the limited self becomes the recipi ent of śaktipāta and is able to attain the proximity of svarūpa, the true form of the Lord, either by following a sequence or by attaining proximity to the Lord without sequence. The Great Lord (Mahesvara) is in essence free, and the causal agent of śaktipāta, for which he does not depend on anything or anyone. The person who is eager to have worldly and otherworldly enjoyment (bhoga) 

32 TANTRASĀRA 

can also attain śaktipāta, but for the bhoga to be manifested, some actions must be performed. Likewise, the person who has the desire for both bhoga and mokṣa is also required to perform cer tain acts in order to attain them. 

It has been stated in the Tantrāloka that śaktipāta is, in essence, the descent of the highest light on the limited soul. It is free from all limitations and is of the characteristic of pure con sciousness. However, śaktipāta of a slightly lower nature, though shining with all the fullness of consciousness, is conditioned with the limitations of bhoga. 

It should be remembered in this context that śaktipāta is really the nature of the icchā or will of the Lord. It is He.who, by His freedom of will, veils Himself and manifests all subjects and objects as limited entities. Due to His activity of conceal ment, known as tirodhāna, the objects to be enjoyed shine before the view of the limited subjects. Thus, He willfully and playfully binds Himself, then removes these bonds, and finally shines in the fullness of jñāna and kriyā. His play of freedom is such that, though He assumes limited forms in an outward journey of con cealing Himself by manifesting and sustaining the universe, He makes a return journey to Himself through the descent of grace and revelation of Himself to Himself, ultimately shining in His pristine pure nature. 

Grace is said to be of two types: the higher, that is, the more pure and potent form, is called para; and the less potent form is apara. The para form of śaktipāta is bestowed only by the Lord Himself, but the apara kind of grace is bestowed by the super intending lords of the domain over which they have control. The form of śakti pāta bestowed by them does not lead the soul to attain śiva-hood, hence it is inferior to the one which flows from the Lord Himself. This apara grace is further divided into manda, less keen, and tivra, exceedingly keen. When apara śaktipāta is manda, it gives birth to right judgment in the soul, upon which the ability to distinguish between prakrti and puruṣa occurs. The result of this type of discrimination is that the soul does not abide 

INTRODUCTION 33 

in the worlds below praksti. When the descent is exceedingly keen (tivra), however, the soul by its merit is able to discriminate his own being from kalā tattva, and as a result becomes one of the Vijñānākala souls. He even arises to the level of mantra when the Lord wills it so. 

After śaktipāta, the author explains the nature of concealment (tirobhāvaa) as one of the five functions (pañcakrtya) of the Lord. Tirobhāva is of two types: niyati krama, when the Lord is seen as the one who ordains the law and the one who bestows the fruits of action in accordance with the merit and demerit of the soul. Here, He takes recourse to niyati, and therefore the functions of creation, maintenance, and dissolution flow from Him. But above māyānda, that is, at the level of śakti, which is beyond the sphere of karma, there continues creation of immense nature. This cre ation is known as mahāsr̥ṣṭi. Similarly, the pralaya of greater nature, that is, the highest form of dissolution, is also performed at this stage. Creation and dissolution of this nature are performed by the Lord without taking recourse to niyati, but those which are performed from the level of māyā downward are accomplished by his taking recourse to niyati. Therefore, at that stage, though He is, in essence, always prabuddha, the enlightened one, he behaves in the worldly level as an unenlightened one. 
