+++
title = "12"

+++

In this chapter, the author presents and substantiates the rea sons for the performance of initiations (diksā). In addressing the question of the necessity of dikṣā, the author states that initia tion alone is the means that leads the soul to enjoyment (bhoga) and finally helps one to attain liberation. Primarily, dikṣā sanc tifies the soul and produces in it the competency for receiving knowledge (jñāna), yoga, etc., for without obtaining dikṣā fol lowing the course of Saiva Yoga would not be possible. Therefore dikṣā is considered to be the preliminary step in the progression from saṁskāra, to the proper practice of yoga, to perfection in 

34 TANTRASĀRA 

yoga, and finally to liberation; or, to put it another way: initiation, saṁskāra, perfection in mantra, worldly and otherworldly enjoy ment (bhoga), and finally, liberation. 

It should be remembered that the highest kind of knowledge is obtained from the holy texts (sāstra). One who is uninitiated is not considered to be the right person to receive instruction in the śāstras, therefore, dīksā is essential. On the other hand, those who have received the highest kind of grace, and thus earned compe tence, do not require any formal dikṣā, for their innate knowledge serves as dīksā for them. To those who are unable to follow the path of knowledge, however, the easier path is recommended; it is predominantly of a ritualistic nature. 

Snāna, bathing, is the preliminary step to dikṣā. Generally, bathing cleanses impurities of the body, but esoterically it helps one to become absorbed into Parameśvara. Ordinarily, bathing is performed with water, according to this system it is a little bit dif ferent: one who goes to take a bath should think of the presence of śiva in his eight forms. By uttering a mantra one should perform one's bath with the eight prescribed materials. Bathing is of two types, external and internal. The former is done by earth, water, the sacred ashes, etc., but the internal one is performed by one's concentration in various locations of the body. The object with which one performs one's bath is charged with a mantra and thus helps the body to become steady in reality, refreshes the body, and cleanses it of impurities. 
