+++
title = "19"

+++

The funeral sacrifice is the final rite for every human being. Ini tiation is given during that period only to a person who, though he belonged to the highest Saiva order, on account of some unknown factor lost the tradition and expired without performing the rites of atonement before death. Such a person is given initiation when his body is placed on the funeral pyre. 

For the purpose of rescuing the deceased, all the rituals are performed upon the body. The final offering into the fire (pūr nāhuti) is performed by burning the body. In order to convince ignorant people, the person who initiates causes the dead body to shake. He does this by means of kriyā, jñāna, and yoga, though it is not necessary for the release of the soul. 

If the deceased person cannot be given initiation during the burning of his corpse, he may be given initiation during his srād 

44 TANTRASĀRA 

dha rite. The teacher takes a ball of rice in his hand and meditates on it as the form of the energizing śakti, and by doing so, the soul of the dead person is possessed. This food is considered to be the portion of animal-like quality of the soul and is really the thing to be enjoyed. When both the bhogya and bhogya śakti become uni fied by the meditation of the acārya, it becomes fit to be offered to the supreme enjoyer, the Lord. Thus, leaving the animalistic portion behind, which is the essence of the bhogya, the bhogya śakti, along with the self, is offered to the supreme bhoktā, the Lord. In this way, the soul becomes identical with Him. It should be remembered that the final procedure is preceded by the homa sacrifice and other rituals. 

· In this chapter, the author raises a relevant question: whether for the knower of reality (tattva jñānin), rituals such as sraddha and others are necessary or not. He answers saying that when, by the light of true knowledge, darkness has been totally removed from the enlightened one, there is no need of a final ritual like antyesti śrāddha, etc. But, for the people who had been closely associated with the departed one, the day of his unification with the Supreme is observed as a day of parva, the day which causes fullness of consciousness in him. 
