+++
title = "21"

+++
This chapter presents the authority of agamas. In the Tantrāloka, āgama has been defined as a well-known fact of old, as prasid dhi. It also emphasizes the point that even agreement and contra riety (anvaya and vyatireka), which are the very life of inference, 

46 TANTRASĀRA 

also depend on prasiddhi. Similarly, perception looks for prasid dhi as its support; for without its help, which is thought to be of the nature of self-reflection (svātmavimarśātmika prasiddhi), it would not be possible to consider anything as acceptable or avoid able. Therefore, prasiddhi lies at the root of every worldly transac tion. The great Lord, who is all-perfect, with the characteristic of I-consciousness, and who is omniscient, is the source of all pra siddhis. He, the Lord, is adorned with a multitude of prasiddhis with the form of enjoyment (bhoga) and release (apavarga). 

The entire universe is of the nature of consciousness, which is nothing but reflective nature, and that again is, in essence, sound. 

• The reflection (vimarśanam) of objects contained by the universe, and of the diverse relations of past deeds and their results, is known as holy texts (sāstra). All the sāstras are not really differ ent from the nature of Parameśvara. The holy texts have a single aim; yet, because of the limiting condition of niyati, people are : strongly attached to only a portion of them. Therefore, some fol 

low the dual system and others are attached to the nondual. In the end, the author concludes that a particular agama should be resorted to only after it has been shown to produce excellent results. 
