+++
title = "11 Aparāditya’s Śaivas by Birth"

+++
A comparable situation is revealed by Aparāditya, the Śilāhāra king of North  Konkan, writing in the early twelfth century, through one of the Śaiva arguments  for acceptability that he puts up to refute in in his commentary on Yājñavalkya smr̥ti. The Śaiva is made to argue that since the adherents of the Vaidika religion  hold that the injunctive force of the Veda is directed only to specific, restricted  classes of persons, they can have no reason to deny that the Śaiva scriptures are  valid for Śaivas as members of a similar community of birth, which suggests that  its members, when asked why they engage in their special Śaiva rituals, would  have responded like Georg Bühler’s Śaiva brahmin informants in Kashmir in 1875  that they attached no special importance to them but did them because this was  the long-established custom of their community.84 

- 84. See Bühler 1877, p. 24, and the discussion of the view that he reports in Sanderson 1995, pp. 37–38,  and 2007b, pp. 110–112. 


Aparāditya responds by attacking the very notion that it is possible to be a Śaiva by birth (jātyā), to be, as it were, a member of a caste of Śaivas. He does so in the course of his commentary on 1.7, which details the means  that enable men to know their religious duty (dharmamūlam) – namely Śruti,  Smr̥ti, observable orthopraxy (sadācāraḥ), and, within the limits set by these, mental satisfaction, enabling one, for example, to decide that one is now ready to end a course of ascetic observance, and personal preference, in such matters  as choosing the time at which to perform some pious action – taking this opportunity to examine the objection that this list wrongly omits the Śaiva, Pāśupata,  Pāñcarātrika, and other (unspecified) scriptural corpora. 

The initial proposition is that these corpora have as good a claim as the Vaidika to be accepted, because they too are eternal revelation, and that therefore  the highest good will be attained by enacting their injunctions. Aparāditya then counters by insisting that this cannot apply to orthoprax Vaidikas, because the  Śaiva scriptures teach that the Vaidika rites are inefficacious when they say, as we  have seen, that these rituals are enjoined on Śaivas not because of their efficacity  but because by doing them in addition to their Śaiva rites Śaivas will ingratiate  themselves with those who, in the Śaiva perspective, are not yet ready for the  higher system.85 

- 85. Yājñavalkyasmr̥tiṭīkā, vol. 1, p. 10, ll. 14–16. 

He next addresses a passage from the Devīpurāṇa that condemns to torture  in hell those who despise either the teaching of Śiva or the Vedas, and a passage  from the Yogayājñavalkya86 which includes ‘the teachings of Paśupati’ (pāśupatam) in a list of those that one is forbidden to challenge with logical argument.  

- 86. A variant of Mahābhārata 12.337.59. 

He argues that these passages merely prohibit condemnation and permit study  and do not allow the inference that one is also permitted to put their injunctions  into practice; 87 and he provides several reasons that block that inference, the most  significant of which is perhaps that if a person were to take Śaiva initiation, as  he would have to do if he intended to enact the Śaiva injunctions, he would be  punished with hell, according to the Śaiva scriptures, if he had a Vaidika Śrāddha  ceremony performed for him.88 

- 87. Yājñavalkyasmr̥tiṭīkā, vol. 1, p. 10, l. 23 to p. 11, l. 5. 
- 88. Yājñavalkyasmr̥tiṭīkā, vol. 1, p. 11, ll. 7–9. 

The unstated point of this, I propose, is that he  thereby provides a refutation of the Śaivas’ claim that their scriptures are acceptable because they require their initiates to adhere rigidly to Vaidika regulations  and so are not contrary to the Veda (vedaviruddha-). For while it is true that they  were enjoined to undergo all the Vaidika rites of qualification (samṣkārāḥ) prior to  their initiation, namely up to upanayanam or marriage, following the procedures  laid down in the Gr̥hyasūtra of their branch of the Veda, one major rite of passage  remained, namely cremation (antyeṣtiḥ), and the various rites of offerings to the  deceased thereafter. For these the Śaivas developed their own rituals and it was  these that had to be followed in the case of the initiated.89 

- 89. See Sanderson 1995, pp. 31–32; and Mirnig 2009. The anonymous ritual manuals used by Śaiva  officiants in Kashmir for cremation and the post-mortuary Śrāddha ceremonies are of two kinds. In  one the Śaiva procedures alone are given. In the other we find both the Vaidika and the Śaiva, the  two proceeding in tandem from phase to phase with the Vaidika element always preceding the Śaiva.  This hybrid, which is not envisaged in the Śaiva Paddhatis of pan-Indian authority, is likely to have  been introduced precisely out of anxiety that omitting the Vaidika procedures might have a negative consequence. See for an example of the hybrid form the Kashmirian manuscript Vaidika-tāntrika-samaṣṭi-vidhinā (samaṣṭi em. : samiṣṭi Cod.) ekoddiṣṭa-śrāddhavidhiḥ (ekoddiṣṭa em. : ekoddiṣṭe Cod.), ‘The  ritual of the Ekoddiṣṭa Śrāddha following the procedure in which Vaidika and Tāntrika [Paddhatis] are  combined.’ This is how the work is identified in its final colophon. At it beginning we read atha vaidikatāntrika ekoddiṣṭa-karaṇavidhiḥ (ekoddiṣṭa em : ekoddiṣṭe Cod.), ‘Next the ritual for performing the  Ekoddiṣṭa [Śrāddha] that is [both] Vaidika and Tāntrika.’ 



It is at this point that he moves on to address the proposition that the Śaiva  scriptures are valid as ordinances for the Śaivas as members of a distinct community entered at birth: 90 

- 90. Yājñavalkyasmr̥tiṭīkā on 1.7, p. 13, l. 23 to p. 14, l. 11. 


> Can it not be conceded that just as the Vedas and [Smr̥tis] apply to only  certain specific persons [defined by their birth] so the Śaiva and other [non Vaidika] scriptures [are valid because they] are for Śaivas and others as per sons who are members of specific communities[, Śaiva or other,] that they  have entered through birth? No, it cannot. This is because in passages such  as ‘No persons other than those for whom all the rites from conception to  cremation with [the Veda’s] Mantras have been prescribed are qualified for this teaching’ Manu and other [promulgators of Smr̥ti texts] have given us evidence only of the qualification of brahmins[, Kṣatriyas,] and [Vaiśyas] for their teachings but not of the qualification of ‘Śaiva brahmins’ and the like for  corpora of scriptures taught by Śiva and others. Then let it be conceded that  Śūdras [at least] are qualified to enact the teachings of Śiva[, since they have  no access to the Veda and its Mantras and so fall outside Manu’s definition  of those who are qualified and obliged to enact his teachings]. But that too we  will not concede, because no Smr̥ti or any other [Vaidika scriptural source]  accepts this. Furthermore, there is in fact no such person as a Śaiva by birth  (jātyā) to whom the Śaiva scriptures could apply. For the word śaivaḥ ‘Śaiva’  [means simply] ‘one who studies or understands the scriptures taught by Śiva’.  [This is established by the semantic conditions governing the formation of the  word śaivaḥ from śivaḥ through śaivam according to the grammatical rules of derivation. Thus] by applying the suffix -a to [the name] śivaḥ ‘Śiva’ we form  [the derivative noun] śaivam in the meaning ‘that which has been taught by  Śiva’, that is to say, the corpus of Śaiva scriptures; and we then form the word  śaivaḥ (‘a Śaiva’) from this in the meaning ‘one who understands or studies  those scriptures’, the same suffix -a being added after the word śaivam in accordance with the rule ‘[-a after N in the sense] “one who studies N, one who understands N” and then elided by the rule “substitution of zero [for -a in  the meaning “one who studies N, one who understands N” when that suffix  comes] after [a word that has already been formed by the addition of the affix -a in the meaning] “taught [by N].” Pāśupata and other [words of this kind,  such as Bauddha, Kāpila, Kāṇāda, Vaiṣṇava, Jaina, etc.] are formed in the  same way [to mean “one who studies or understands what has been taught by  Paśupati,” and so on].” 91 So the Śaiva and analogous bodies of scripture function without having naturally fixed social groups to ground them; and from  this it follows that they are analogous to pictures [drawn] in the air. This being  the case, they must certainly be rejected [as sources of valid knowledge] in [the  domain of] religious practice. 

- 91. The grammmatical rules that Aparāditya applies here are Pāṇini, Aṣṭādhyāyī 4.3.101, 4.2.59, and  4.2.64. 

The view whose prevalence is attested by this attack would have been equally  unacceptable to the likes of Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha II and Abhinavagupta, though  for the very different reason that it reveals a complete surrender of the properly  Śaiva view that Śaivism is a universal revelation, reaching anyone whom Śiva deems ready to be liberated, regardless of such incidentals as region, caste, or  lineage.92 

- 92. Note in this context the commonly expressed Śaiva doctrine that division by birth into castes is an artificial construct that overlays and obscures the unity of humanity. For text and translation of text  passages, both Saiddhāntika and non-Saiddhāntika, that express this conviction see Sanderson 2009a,  pp. 289–290, fns. 689–692, and pp. 292–294; and Sanderson 2009b. 

It is entirely reasonable to claim in the light of this evidence that a complex corresponding roughly to what would come to be called Hinduism was already recognized, though not yet named, around the turn of the ninth and tenth centuries.  

At this juncture Jayanta assures us that the orthoprax majority had conceded  that the Vaiṣṇavism of the Pañcarātra and the non-transgressive forms of Śaivism  (therefore excluding those of the Bhairavatantras and Kulamārga) were valid and  that communities that followed them were acceptable co-religionists; and we have  seen evidence that Jayanta’s portrayal of these systems was not merely an outsider’s projection: it corresponded to the way in which what was probably the great majority of Vaiṣṇava and Śaiva adherents had come to see themselves, by  surrendering the doctrines that were intended to keep alive their sense of tran scendence. This change of perspective, moreover, is one that is certainly more  tolerant of diversity than the strictly Śaiva, which admitted only a hierarchy in  which other vehicles of salvation, Vaidika and Vaiṣṇava, are subordinate to it.  

Here we have rather the view that the Vaidika, Vaiṣṇava, and Śaiva paths are  options determined by inherited practice leading to a single Vaidika goal. It must  be kept in mind, however, that this congeries of equipolent options was never the  whole of Indian religious awareness in this period. Learned scholars among the  Śaivas and Śākta-Śaivas strove by various strategies to keep alive in initiates the  scripturally sanctioned belief that their Śaiva practices were not just a variant of a  single accommodating religion but something which had the power to lead them  to an ultimate goal that far transcended what either the Vaidika or the Vaiṣṇava  system could reach, and Vaidika ideologues such as Aparāditya held out to the  bitter end against this trend to accept what from their point of view was forbidden religious practice following false scriptures. 
