+++
title = "13 Conclusions - Identity Among the Possessed and the Dispossessed"

+++

> All in all, one would probably prefer to have a self.  
—DAVID SHULMAN (1994:1)

### Variation and Vocabulary
Having worked our way through this whirlwind tour—this grand if sometimes bewildering tapestry of Indic literature and ethnography, emotions big and small, ritual formations, health and disease, initiatory trauma and transformation, and much more—we now offer reactions and a few conclusions. First, however, summary descriptions of various kinds of possession are in order. Possession may be destructive (Kali possessing Nala and childsnatchers invading the bodies of pregnant women), instructional (the possession by gandharvas of the daughter and wife of Patañcala Kāpya in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad (BĀU) in what must have been a semipublic séance, and Śaṅkara’s possession of the dead king in order to obtain knowledge of erotics and defeat Ubhayabhāratī, the wife of Maṇḍana Misra, in debate), healing or unifying (possession by Soma, transfer of essences described in the Upaniṣads, tantric śaktipāta initiation), protective (Vipula Bhārgava possessing Ruci), symptomatic of perfected devotion (the līlāveśa or bhagavadāvesa of Vallabhācārya and Rūpa Gosvāmī), a tool used by advanced yogins to influence others (Yogasūtras, Brahmasūtras), or indicative of a state of immersion in erotic love, in the cycle of rebirth, in the Lord’s love games, or even in the Lord’s very body (again bhagavadāveśa, saṃsārāveśa, līlāveśa). When humans possess others, as in the case of Vipula Bhārgava or Śaṅkara, the purpose is viewed as benign. It is regarded similarly when the possessing agent is a substance, an abstraction, or an essence (soma, medhas, etc.). When negative spirits (bhuta, piśāca, etc.) are the agents of possession, it is considered destructive. But when the agent is a semidivine being with a preponderance of good qualities, such as a gandharva, ambiguous results are weighted toward the positive.

I have identified three distinctions within the lexicography of possession, all with wide margins and hazy boundaries: those represented by āvesa, praveśa, and grahana. In spite of these margins and boundaries, however, āveśa exhibits much less polysemy than the other terms, indicating that its semantic field rarely slips beyond the boundaries proposed here. Āveśa suggests self-induced pervasion of a distinct and attractive force within the personality, even if what is attractive is negative, such as anger. More appositely, it is self-induced possession of a celestial or ethereal being, from a goddess who confers oracular experience (this is often found in the ethnographic record) to an experience of thorough destructiveness, such as the possession of Asvatthāman by Śiva (Mahābhārata [MBh] 10.7.64–65). In all cases, āveśa indicates a significant shift in personality. This is usually a learned and controlled dissociative behavior that is consuming, integrative, and seamless, with little trace of inner conflict, at least in the short run. In these two varieties of āveśa, the experiences of emotional absorption and that of spirit or deity possession are nearly indistinguishable. An example of this occurs in the MBh when “a bitter rage took possession” (tīvraroṣasamāviṣṭā; 3.60.34)1 of Damayantī after a hunter who rescued her from the jaws of a boa constrictor, then tried to rape her. It is important to understand that this manner of speaking, which is familiar in the English language, is taken more literally in South Asia. In the West, emotion is devalued much more than it is in South Asia, as we saw in Chapter 8, and this example is one among countless numbers that reveal the nexus of emotion and possession (see Chapter 6, for evidence from the MBh). Āveśa is driven to another level when it becomes samāveśa, a term used profusely in Tantric texts to indicate a state of complete absorption in an object or deity.2

The use of the word praveśa reflects possession’s hazy boundaries. Generally it bears the sense of externally motivated possession, as in parakāya- or paraśarīra-praveśa, possessing another’s (para-) body (kāya, śarīra), though more infrequently āveśa is used in this sense. Praveśa, when it is distinguished from āvesa, indicates suppression of the individual personality without disturbing its constructed identity. An entity or thought form is introduced by an external agent in order to bring about a specific result in the body, or less often the mind, of the one possessed. A result may occur without the knowledge of the possessed individual, thus not interfering with his or her conscious intention or volition. Externally induced possession in this sense differs significantly from the kind of brahmanical possession that is embodied through nyāsa and (prāṇa-)pratiṣṭhā (Chapter 10). The main difference between them in this context is that nyāsa is self-induced whereas (prāṇa-)pratiṣṭhā is externally induced. Nevertheless, the piecemeal or gradual manner in which the pervasion and transformation occurs in these rituals is ambiguous with respect to āveśa and praveśa, not fitting easily into either category. Yet, like both of them, these serial invocations fundamentally alter the identity and character of the ritualist or iconic form.

Another instance of the absence of standardization in the vocabulary of possession is seen in the use of the word parigraha in Yogācāra Buddhism, in the phrase ātmabhāva-parigraha (taking possession of a [new] personal existence) (Chapter 7). This is similar in meaning to Vallabhācārya’s saṃsārāveśa (Chapter 9), immersion in the cycle of rebirth. Possession expressed as grahaṇa and etymologically related terms more often than not indicate conflict with the possessing agent without suppression of the intent or personality of the possessed. The desires and attributes of one afflicted by spirits called grahas remain intact, though the presence of the graha introduces into the personality an element of conflict, instability, or destructiveness. The section on childsnatchers (bālagrahas) in the MBh (Chapter 6) and the chapter on demonologies (bhūtavidyā) in Āyurveda, Tantra, and various ethnographic reports (Chapter 12) bear this out.

### Possession and Embodiment
Among the prominent images in the Upaniṣads is that of the body as a locus for external forces. Although the early Upaniṣads are best known for their discussions of interior topography, they also display a sure knowledge of and deep concern for the physical body. Their knowledge of organs and other aspects of human physiology is derived largely from the antecedent Brāhmaṇa literature, in most cases indicating that this knowledge served purposes other than health. Principally, the purpose was to describe animals fit for sacrifice. This vision is modified in the Yoga, Śaiva, and other, later subgenres of Upaniṣads, when interest in the vedic sacrifices had begun to wane, to one in which the body is seen to encase nāḍīs (channels that circulate within the body) and cakras (subtle energy centers that are lined up vertically from the perineum to the crown of the head). Thus, the tantric vision of the body led to modifications in the Upaniṣadic view (e.g., Dhyānabindu Upaniṣad 50–72, Yogacūḍāmaṇi Upaniṣad).3 Increasingly, through various practices of yoga (āsana and prāṇāyāma), the body was viewed as transmutable. Although this is most evident in the later Upaniṣads, the early ones foreshadow them in this regard. In the waking state, the “self” (ātman) is said to abide in the heart, but in deep sleep and dream it wanders in the nāḍīs (BĀU 2.1.17). Sometimes it exits the body entirely, leaving the prāṇas in charge. At death, according to the later Upaniṣads, it leaves the body via the suṣumnā nāḍī (central upwardly flowing channel) (Yogaśikha Upaniṣad 6.5, etc.). The chief function of the body, then, is to house the life force (jīva) and, according to some Upaniṣads, the ātman. Brahmā, the Taittirīya (2.1.1) and Muṇḍaka (3.1.7) Upaniṣads state, dwells in the guhā, the space in the heart. Similarly, according to the Kaṭha (2.20) and Śvetāśvatara (3.11) Upaniṣads, the deity dwells in the guhā of all creatures. The Muṇḍaka (2.1.8,10) and Svetāsvatara (3.20) add that puruṣa is placed in it, while the Maitrāyaṇi Upaniṣad (26) states that ātman enters into it. The Kaṭha (4.6) says that the firstborn of Brahmā and Āditya enter and abide there, while many later Upaniṣads list a number of possible deities who assume residence in this secret place. The late Subala Upaniṣad (7.8), for example, states that Nārāyaṇa dwells there, while the Kaivalya Upaniṣad (3) states that the mendicant (yati) enters (visānti) what shines in the secret place.4 As explicated in Chapter 5, the Indic body was ripe for possession.

It should be clear by now that the possession experience as revealed in Sanskrit texts and modern ethnographies is at once embodied and disembodied. Allowing liberal room for variation, the descriptive and linguistic material presented here reveals a consistency, a more or less consensual affirmation that the subjectivity of emotion, both as experienced and evaluated states, merges in possession states with the (presumed) objectivity of spirits, deities, or entities and notions with an even greater degree of abstraction.5 What the evidence here reveals, moreover, is that the embodied self in possession states “on the ground” in Sanskrit texts only vaguely resembles the normative self of Indian analytical thought as presented in Sāṃkhya, Vedānta, Buddhism, and Āyurveda.6 More generally, the ubiquitousness of possession states in South Asia calls into question the very notion of personal identity. The Upaniṣads, says Wimal Dissanayake, “reflect a certain unwillingness to take adequately into consideration the world of sense perception.”7 Although the Weltanschauung officially registered by brahmanical and other South Asian orthodoxies idealizes an asceticism that in its public presentation takes a dim view of corporality, Frits Staal points out that, on the contrary, embodiment is highly valued, at least to practitioners of yoga, where “physical exercises are not ascetic mortifications [but] are conceived of as ‘perfections’ (siddhi).” Indeed, what is sought after through development of the body “is ‘altered states,’ but not ‘of consciousness’ (as in contemporary Western adaptations), but of the body.”8 This can also be said of possession, which is necessarily an altered bodily state, regardless of whether the possession is deemed positive or negative.

What possession states reveal is an embodiment dominated by intentionality, emotion, desire, aversion, physical need, subtle essences, a tendency to action, and cyclical or ritual modes of functioning. This paradigm is very different from the description in Bhagavad Gītā 13.1–6, in which the self as body is said to be composed of the five mahābhutas or great elements (earth, water, fire, air, space), ego, reason, the unmanifest (avyakta), the ten senses and the mind, the five sensory fields, desire, aversion, happiness and suffering, the embodied whole, intelligence, and steadfastness. The former reveals a body constructed of abstractions closer to the early and middle vedic model than to the model presented in Sāṃkhya and most of the Upaniṣads.9

What, then, is the body possessed? As Staal understands it, the meaning of the body is its very presence, the fact of its being and its movement.10 Its meaning does not reside in secondary analysis, in verbalizing, in communicating. The body possessed is not symbolic of something else, nor is it, in itself, a message to be communicated to a culturally conditioned public, a reinforcement of a set of beliefs. If Staal is to be believed, and his argument appears cogent, the important anthropological theory that communication is the very essence of being, action, and ritual, is nullified. Following Humphrey and Laidlaw, it is not necessary that we project our own drive (especially an academic drive) for derivative meaning onto others.

Personality was never far removed from visions of the body. In classical India personality was described in different terms from those familiar to the modern world, with very different abstractions and psychological influences. Whereas modern societies express personality as the sum of one’s experiences, thoughts, emotions, inhibitions, moments of freedom, and so on, in India of old the complexity was expressed differently. One of the vehicles for understanding personality in classical India was the grid of physicality presented in the Sāṃkhya philosophy, with the senses and sense organs evolving in a linear fashion from primordial materiality (prakṛti), an abstraction absent in Western thought. In this way, the structure of the body and its perceptual equipment reached deeply and directly into the nature of reality itself. Thus, fundamental changes in the surface levels of individuality resonated deeply into the shared level of primordiality, creating a channel by which penetration of external forces could be felt through the entire system. Although possession is nowhere described in this manner, it seems to be a viscerally felt mechanism running throughout most formal Indian epistemological systems. After Sāṃkhya became incorporated into the Mahābhārata and the foundational āyurvedic texts in the early centuries of the Common Era, personality was most often constructed along its gridlines. However, the Sāṃkhya explanatory system did not obliterate other systems completely; it was in fact coeval with the remnants of an earlier more vedic system, in which personality included cosmological trace elements that entered the individual from outside. Thus, whether it was constructed according to Sāṃkhya or its antecedent systems, the individual was not conceived of as autonomous, as is the dominant position in the West.11 The individual was, instead, conceived of as porous, allowing trace material from Brahmā, the Ādityas, and other beings from devas to rākṣasas to enter. As shown in Chapter 12, categories of invasive bhūtas or grahas corresponded to categories of sattvas that served as the foundations of personality. The brief summary of the mechanics of entrance from the Upaniṣads given above, then, may be regarded as paradigmatic of the way personality was formed, regardless of whether it took root along the gridlines of Sāṃkhya.

Possession, regardless of the term used for it, was often understood in Sanskrit (and other Indic) texts as a modification of personality, rather than as a psychological aberration for which the individual must necessarily be held accountable. “Positive” possession was esteemed, if somewhat feared, and those subject to it were most often productive members of their communities. By contrast, “negative” possession befell individuals regarded as unstable; indeed, their possession was the mark of their instability. In most cases, however, negative possession was usually regarded as treatable, and the practice of mental health care in India beginning in the ancient period has regarded the possessed individual as a victim, rather than a perpetrator. Even if the treatments were sometimes heavy-handed, as the āyurvedic texts indicate was possible, they were invariably designed to exorcise the bhūta or graha as well as rebalance the individual’s humors or doṣas. Whether positive or negative, possession was viewed as a fortuitous, though by no means unnatural, experience of intensity that was often so subtle that it went unnoticed by others in everyday life. Possession may or may not be recognized by the conscious mind of either the possessed or the observer, occurring as it does as a result of an inherent capacity or vulnerability, or, viewing it from the perspective of the widely assimilated Sāṃkhya cosmogony, the effect of an openness structured by the fluid progression from sense organs (indrīya) to primordial materiality (prakṛti). Within that space, any idea or internal form can materialize and mutate. As such, it may also fall anywhere within the extreme limits of subjectification and objectification, which are often the same thing. As such, it has not and cannot have been completely censored by the agents of brahmanical prudery; it is available in the interstices and thus has been addressed less graphically by the classical philosophers, poets, and mystics, to whom organization, boundaries, and control have been paramount, than by poets, indigenous medical authors, and ethnographers, to whom physical symptoms and gestures were often more accessible.12

Regardless of the brahmanical source, possession has been dealt with as a kind of intrusion and intensity, an undermining, shifting, or transforming of the identity of the possessed. And regardless of the form that the possession takes, it demonstrates the fragility of personal identity, its instability, elusiveness, and permeability. The latter is illustrated in the juxtaposition of the gross (sthūla-), the subtle (sūkṣma- or liṇga-), and the causal (kāraṇa-) bodies (śarīra), in classical Indian religio-philosophical thought, each with progressively diminishing corporality, which nevertheless command the capacity to pass to one another data in the form of trace material of past experience.13 Another ready illustration of the threat to the notion of the autonomous person is the Indian ideal of enlightenment, in which the limitations and defects of personal identity are transcended. The transactions and transformations involved in this are rooted in bandhu or bandhutā, an epistemological strategy dating to the middle vedic period, discussed in Chapter 5, in which entities or ideas are identified with each other, all of which are believed to possess degrees of affective physicality.14 These range from “The dawn is the head of the horse,” the classic beginning of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad, to “I am brahman” (ahaṃ brahmāsmi; BĀU 1.4.10), one of the classic utterances of enlightenment (mahāvākya).15 These contribute to the conclusion that personal identity as construed in brahmanical India is characterized by permeable boundaries.

Āveśa, praveśa, and related terms represent extensions into later India of this “vedic” way of seeing the universe, the self, and the body. The individual, in this case, would not be fractured by possession, but recognized as intrinsically vulnerable, permeable, and connected with other objects, many of them unexpected. The components of the individual, including the mind, body, and physical and conceptual environments, are equally permeable; possession in all its different varieties expresses the collapse of their boundaries, or even of their substantial differences.16 The distinction between mind and body, humanity and nature, essence, idea, quality, and deity, would be (largely) one of degree rather than of kind, as, indeed, one tends to understand from Indian texts. The sharp limitation imposed by Vedānta, that the self (ātman) is identical in essence with the absolute (brahman) but not with anything relational, is not borne out in other literary contexts, where “floating forms” are equally constitutive of the self and of personal identity.17 This view is supported by Marriott’s and Inden’s ethnosociology and the view of the person construed therein,18 in which, states Arjun Appadurai, “South Asians do not separate the moral from the natural order, act from actor, person from collectivity, and everyday life from the realm of the transcendent.”19

In this way possession is simultaneously utopian and dystopian; this dialogic quality is the sine qua non of its body politic. The embodied self, porous and available for possession, becomes contested geography, a condition of uncertainty that invites openness and frustration. The latter occurs because openness embeds a liberating multivocality, but one that is challenged, first, by the expectation of identity and the habitus implied therein and, second, by one’s locus within the social system. Personal habits and peculiarities are what distinguish an individual within a culture, even one with a rigid social structure. One’s locus in the social system is defined by occupation, family, and, in India, caste. All of these recede into liminality when the agent is possessed. This liminality, in which human and divine or two humans are centrally attributed, tugs at one’s identity so strongly that the fabric of the individual becomes reshaped and risks being permanently scarred. Identity is transferred from moment to moment, guided by a circumscribed set of conditions and conditionings. This constantly mutating identity threatens to implode into creative openness while simultaneously exploding into social and political catastrophe. Possession, no matter how it manifests, is traumatic in the same way that disease or enlightenment can be. Disease, such as consumptive cancer, or physical injury, such as the loss of a limb or amnesia resulting from brain damage, disrupts our sense of self, as does death in the family, loss of our home, failure in our job, and so on. So, it is said, does an experience of enlightenment, as we can no longer function as we did previously. When our sense of who we are shifts unexpectedly and suddenly, our identity is disrupted and we lose our center. Partial or complete personality or identity displacement, which could be a product of an extreme and often practiced dissociation (usually acknowledged to be enticing and attractive) is a generally recognized aspect of the experience of possession. It is an experience of alterity, a fundamental, even unrecognizable strangeness, within the individual. It is the outsider within the complex individual, with his or her narrative of identity, who evaluates and comes to terms with the multivocality within.

Possession, then, whether positive or negative, is a state of tension, of lived irony, in which dilemmas are resolved (for better or worse) because the volition of the dominant, socially hegemonic voice is reduced to the point of disappearance as another authority is expressed through the body. In possession, the self-interest inherent in individual agency is overcome, replaced with a force that is, improbably, more believable and trustworthy than that usually expressed by the individual. Thus, possession expresses what Durkheim regarded as the heterogeneity of the sacred and the profane: the divine authority of the body and the bodily authority of the divine.

Can we characterize a dominant structure of personal identity in India, at least before the modern period of Westernization?20 Have there always been battle lines between individual autonomy and multivocality in which, in the end, the dominance of the former must be threatened, disrupted, or even terminated? This, arguably, is what Kṛṣṇa did to Arjuna on the battlefield at Kurukṣetra. He presented to Arjuna an alternative to his narrative of himself. Arjuna had locked in a notion of himself through a selective narrative that refused to recognize his multivocality. In the end, though Arjuna capitulated, he shied away from the vision of finality, the viśvarūpa-darśana, that Kṛṣṇa presented to him in the eleventh chapter of the Gitā.

More germane is a 1995 editorial in The Times of India by Dipankar Gupta, which states, “A close reading of our Constitution and of the Constituent Assembly debates will show that there was a marked hesitation among our national representatives to articulate the notion of a self-subsistent and unencumbered individual.”21 Although the editorial was concerned with the supposedly fundamental human right to success in the face of the Indian system of job quotas and educational reservations based on caste, the startling fact is that the ill-defined notion of the “self-subsistent and unencumbered individual” in ancient and classical India changed little throughout Indian history. The individual was rarely considered the definitive human unit, at least in Hindu India, generally relinquishing that role to the family or caste (jāti rather than varṇa). Because the social boundaries of the individual were intrinsically permeable, the notion of possession, of not subsisting or acting alone, was easily realized. Indeed, bodily boundaries were penetrated or dissolved by the simple ritual of nyāsa, by an advanced yogin or yoginī projecting his or her consciousness or thoughts, by demons of disease, or by intense emotional engagement. This is not just an Indian peculiarity. It is echoed in China as well. Isabelle Robinet comes to similar conclusions based on her research into Daoist meditation practices. She writes, “Man is not conceived of as a completed whole formed from a single entity. Rather, man appears as a turbulent world whose unity is still to be achieved—as a plurality of forces which must be unified or as a totality which must be realized.”22

Westerners, and perhaps scholars in particular, whose livelihood depends on individual achievement and self-sufficiency and who must commence any study of identity with the view that the individual self is sovereign, unique, and inviolate, find it difficult to comprehend the shadowy frontiers of the individual in India and its cultural acknowledgement of deity and spirit possession. Diana Eck writes appositely of the “distinctively Western habit of thought, grounded primarily in the Western tradition of monotheism: the expectation of singularity and uniqueness, and the valuing of such singularity and uniqueness.”23 Eck refers to James Hillman’s notion of a “‘monotheism of consciousness,’ which has to do not only with our way of thinking about God, but with our way of thinking about persons as ‘individuals,’ our ways of thinking about authority in the structures of family, church, and state, and our way of thinking about questions of truth.”24 This contrasts with the Indian sense of identity grounded in an indigenous religious and cultural imagination, with its marked hesitation to articulate an autonomous individual. Eck continues: “Oneness and manyness are not seen as true opposites. In the Hindu tradition, matters of importance are thought of quite naturally in the singular and the plural. Singularity or uniqueness is not the sole mark of significance.… The profusion of gods and scriptures is matched by a polycentric religious life, social structure, and family structure. There is no one clear, unmistakable center. Manyness is valued; indeed, it is seen as essential.”25 Ariel Glucklich points out that this notion of an inviolate, sovereign self is of recent vintage in the West. He cites Carl Jung in support of this: “Not so very long ago even highly civilized people believed that psychic agencies could influence our minds and feelings. There were ghosts, wizards, and witches, daemons and angels, and even gods, who could produce certain psychological changes in human beings.”26 Glucklich adds, “This kind of thinking resulted not only, or even mainly, from a primitive philosophy but from a porous sense of self lacking rigid external boundaries.”27

Thus, by adhering to culturally and academically bounded assumptions of the singularity and inviolability of the individual, the phenomenon of possession has been analyzed (chiefly by anthropologists, as we have seen, who have claimed it as their bailiwick) as psychological illness, even schizophrenia, as sociological role-playing or status seeking, as expressions of cosmological beliefs, willful manifestation of good or evil, or as an aspect of cultural performance: as anything, in fact, except spirit or deity possession, phenomena that defy both the solid boundaries of the individual assumed by Westerners and the scientific rules of the academic trade.28

The fact is that the individual in India disappeared into family or caste, or into spiritual unity with brahman, or was infiltrated and transfigured by deities and spirits. John Stanley, defending the indigenous voice, contends that during possession states the individual believes that cosmic forces are expressed. He states, “since scientific knowledge is based on empirical experience, a religious experience such as possession which cannot be rationally understood, gets reduced to ‘symbols,’ ‘projections’ or illusions. In this way the reality of possession as a religious experience is ignored by many anthropologists.”29 This may not be a very popular notion among social scientists, many of whom, I daresay, still harbor assumptions that may be labeled “orientalist.” One of the purposes of this book is to question certain orientalist presuppositions. The one to which I refer here is that a particular soul and a particular body are coexistent and are the solitary makers of personal identity—a Western pre-Christian notion that is both elaborated and undermined in various phases of Christian narrativity.30 Possession undercuts this notion, but it is a notion that will prove very difficult to shed, as it is the foundation of the notion of the individual autonomous being, which is in turn the bedrock of the empiricism of the social sciences.

What anthropologists, ethnographers, and historians of religion have failed to recognize is the extended context of what was regarded in India as possession. Most scholarship has limited possession to intrusive and disintegrative states that fall within the realm of graha(ṇa) or else to oracular possession expressed in festival or other ritual contexts. But, as we have seen here, possession has many more dimensions in India, for example, the Buddhist concept of ātmabhāva-parigraha, a person “completely gripped by the experience of the self,” or devotional possession. The former is conceptually close to Vallabhācārya’s saṃsārāveśa, a person “possessed by the cycle of rebirth.” It would be a mistake to disregard these and countless other examples as simply tropes. Such statements were intended more literally than our own tropes, such as “she’s writing like a woman possessed,” or “he’s possessed by love.” For Asvatthāman to be possessed by rage meant that he was possessed by Śiva, not just by the power of Śiva. With respect to devotional possession, Yocum writes: “In no case does Māṇikkavācakar’s—or any other devotee—use his possession as a means for divination, curing, or mediumship.31 Māṇikkavācakar’s possession, his god-intoxication, has no reference to third parties. It is solely a manifestation of his communion with Śiva, which is an end in itself.”32 Similarly, for Ramakrishna possession brought about, and was sometimes equated with, ecstatic vision. Under the control of the goddess, possessed by her, he extended his tongue ecstatically (and transgressively) “to commune with wine, human meat, fish, polluted rice, even feces and urine. Again and again, it reaches out to commune with that which society deems disgusting and shameful.”33 Because this ecstasy is relational, it meets the criteria of āveśa rather than samādhi.

These are the types of thick descriptions that I have been searching for, largely in vain, in Sanskrit literature. We must conclude that in India possession was a state of mind characterized by intensity, emotional excitement, and desire, and that the perceived distinction between these states and those more easily labeled possession by ethnographers and others is a matter of degree rather than kind.34 While we must, on the one hand, recognize a broadly defined category of possession that includes āveśa, praveśa, graha(ṇa), and so on, we might, on the other hand, be better advised to abandon the category entirely in favor of closely related indigenous categories of human experience marked by the permeability of human identity. If for no other reason, this may be recommended in order to heal the stigma left by the application of the category “possession.” Although I have not found it practical to do that here, I have left sufficient room for that to serve as the basis for a future undertaking.

### Sudden and Gradual
I cannot disagree with Gombrich’s statement that “brahmanism inculcates control,” but I believe that such a notion must be nuanced based on the foregoing discussions. We have established that possession is a liminal state of mind,35 with mundane concerns and discourse reconfigured though not ignored. We have also seen that “positive” possession almost always emerges from ritual. Such ritual works in one of two basic ways. The first, brahmanical, inculcates a controlled state of possession through the observance of complicated and precise processes. The second, typically non-brahmanical in the sense of non-Sanskritic (this was never a disincentive to brahman participation),36 encourages possession by inculcating strategies for release rather than control. The former amounts to a guided gradual transformation through metamorphosis, while the latter amounts to a guided sudden release. In both cases we are speaking of ritual that depicts the tension between freedom and discipline. Although the gradualists are beset with a greater number of formal rules, in both cases style and structure are important, conferring a sense of rigorousness that is essential for materialization of the process.

The “gradualist school” is sastraic, analytical, and process-oriented, while the “sudden school” (apologies to Zen aficionados) creates release through intense emotional engagement. The former bears the ritualist into a state of ontological hybridity through a series of identifications, while the latter accomplishes the same through a wholesale submersion into an idealized form of a deity (such as Kālī or Hanumān), a mood (love, ferocity, quiescence, etc.), or an environment (e.g., Krishna’s līlās). Brahmanical hybridity may be thought of as a tapestry, a planned and executed complex pattern woven on a single uniform backing. In this particular tapestry each essence, deity, spirit, or other entity occupies a discrete space on or within the body, empowering and transfiguring it. This usually requires the complementary observance of brahmanical rites of purification. Compared to “sudden school” strategies, it inculcates control by keeping the consciousness and intentionality of the ritualist intact and dominant. It is neither festival nor oracular and may be very private. Yet it is a metamorphosis, but it cannot be called shape-shifting. Thus, I argue, it is fair to label it possession. In the sudden school, the hybridity is more deeply rooted, as two beings or essences coexist, with one supplanting another in an internal and idiosyncratic scale of identity markers. Unlike in gradualist possession, the intentionality and decision making capabilities of the agent are ambiguous and often absent. Bynum would label the former as metamorphosis and the latter alone as hybridization. But I would disagree with that assessment in this context. Both, it seems to me, are hybrids in different formulations. Bynum writes: “Metamorphosis breaks down categories by breaching them; hybrid forces contradictory or incompatible categories to coexist and serve as commentary on the other.”37 Bynum’s analysis of metamorphosis based on medieval Christian narrative cannot be readily applied to the array of material in South Asia. In brahmanical possession, the process of metamorphosis transforms categories of bodily integrity by breaking them down and rebuilding them analytically. The result is a hybrid being seamlessly constituted out of a collocation of compatible entities or notions. This is in contrast to non-brahmanical possession, in which contradictory or incompatible beings, entities, notions, or categories may exist.

The orthodox impulse, which does not have the marks of a conspiracy, has been to control this phenomenon through benign neglect, by ignoring or avoiding it in formal discourse, by tacitly declaring it irrelevant,38 though we have seen here that possession is acknowledged or discussed in more than 170 Sanskrit texts.39 This is not a large number, however, considering the vast number of texts in Sanskrit. Perhaps as the ultimate form of emotional engagement, possession can assume a place in Indic intellectual culture only by confining it in nonthreatening ritual, making it retrievable through occasional fable and story, or locating it in the discourses of engagement described in this volume.

Nyāsa, the brahmanical practice of possession, has a restricted domain because of its locus within rarefied Sanskritic culture. But in the larger cultural domain, it is closely juxtaposed with other orbits of ritual, including small séances or festivals in which oracular possession might occur. The evidence for this is both textual (the brahman Bhujyu Lahyayani’s presence at the séances held by the wife and daughter of Patañcala Kāpya and my own analysis herein of svasthāvesa) and ethnographic (cf. Sax, Hancock, and others who write of brahman participation in “non-brahman” possession ritual). What Pollock calls the “massive presence of discursive domination in Sanskrit culture,”40 does not, apparently, figure into this aspect of Indic culture. We are accustomed to imagining India’s being pervaded by philosophical doctrines of control and a self (ātman) situated in a straightforward relationship with either an abstract absolute (brahman) or a single supreme deity. Equally significant and pervasive, however, were a hybridized self and notions of identity that were open, permeable, and without fixed boundaries. Examination of the phenomenon of possession (and its typological kinfolk) demonstrates that the “notion of a self-subsistent and unencumbered individual” hardly existed in “Sanskrit culture.” Multiple or hybrid identities were sanctioned, indeed often idealized, in the literate cultures of classical India (which is to say they were not considered pathological), even as they were appropriated—in fact induced—by techniques of ritual, yoga, and Vedānta. Pervasion by soma, the transfer of an essence like medhas, influencing the actions of another as a result of entering his or her body with one’s mind, disease—particularly mental—induced by the entrance of destructive spirits, shifts in consciousness as a result of initiatory experience or devotional absorption into a deity, and so on—all erode the “notion of a self-subsistent and unencumbered individual.” The power of the gradualist school was somewhat deceptive, except on paper, where it reigned supreme, and very few Indians, save a few hopeful brahmans, accepted the “discursive domination of Sanskritic culture” in matters religious when deeply emotional and richly transformative possession was available.

The ideologies, and to a lesser extent the processes, of gradual and sudden possession are dialogical; they negotiate in both directions: less privileged nonelite nonprofessionals poach on the discourse of privileged elite professionals by adopting their symbols and images, thus demarcating a realm of social and political safety for their experience, while the elites, the priesthoods, extend their domain by creating discourse mechanisms through which they domesticate popular practice. As shown in culture after culture, elite participation in popular practice contributes to this negotiation between professionals and nonprofessionals, highly educated elites and less-educated subalterns. Thus, at the risk of appearing immoderately Dumontian, I find myself in substantial agreement with Madeleine Biardeau, who writes: “From the beginning of my Indological studies, I have been quite convinced that Hindu society was much less divided ideologically, that the top and the bottom were not so utterly alien to each other, than was usually contended, particularly among anthropologists.”41

### Questions and (a Few) Answers
In Chapter 2, I inquired as to what extent we can equate possession as discourse with possession as event. My answer(s) to this difficult question should have become clear in the course of this study. Essentially, the wealth of evidence both textual and ethnographic demonstrates that the link between discourse and event is so proximate that it is nearly indistinguishable. The discourse of possession in India is not just verbal or linguistic but performative as well. Possession is not just an inner experience defined by one’s intensity of feeling and focus, dissociative powers, and linguistic and performative capabilities; it is an event that is publicly negotiable and verifiable. Standards and paradigms of possession are available in South Asian public culture, both contemporary and ancient, and may be verified in the ethnographies and classical texts. The issue of discourse is closely tied in with the nature of individuality and the individual in South Asia and whether possession can contribute to a greater understanding or unveiling of that nature. I ask, in effect, whether a partially or fully manifested and attributed deity or spirit, within the locally constructed nexus of discourse and event, destroys the fabric of the individual. I have also wondered, apropos of these questions, whether it is a mistake to assume an autonomous individual in the first place.

Keeping in mind the four definitions of possession given in the first section of Chapter 2, I answer these questions by first noting that possession is a strategy or series of strategies employed for developing an interconnectivity of prescribed social and spirit(ual) universes (and discourses) with the improvisatory nature of fate, a method of coping with and examining the collision between the fixity of role and the randomness of life. Indeed, possession has always had an intriguing subversiveness that seeks to turn the mysteries of asymmetry and randomness to one’s advantage. What I’m suggesting is that possession reveals the individual to be so porous and indefinite that we must conclude that it is a tenuous social construction. This is not a unique or surprising conclusion in this day and age, when spirit and spiritual universes and discourses appear to be more isolated, disconnected, and inimical than ever before, and fate more improvisatory. Neither is this a negative assessment; it is, rather, an acknowledgment that possession is both self-affirming and radically transformative. As part of a socially sanctioned religious system, it affirms the social self while eclipsing the spiritually isolated self. The South Asian experience indicates that the disjunctions, isolations, or alienations that typify our lives emanate from collusions of moral and natural order, act and actor, person and collectivity, and everyday life and the realm of the transcendent, to adapt Appadurai’s ethnosociological observation cited above. In this disjunctive and disjointed world, possession is healing: It concentrates essences, entities, actors, and agents while bringing the above-mentioned polarities together experientially. In essence, the mutual impact of discourse and event forces us to acknowledge that we become more ourselves when we recognize that we are, in fact, less ourselves. This is the paradox of both oracular possession and the Indic concept of selfhood, stripped of its institutional veneer of brahman-ātman ideology.

By now we should be able to evaluate the sources that speak of possession in all its Sanskritic lexical incarnations and discern specific patterns of what is and is not included under this rubric. Possession is abundantly evident in the Ṛgveda and other early vedic texts. It is equally visible in certain Upaniṣads, the Mahābhārata, medical and tantric texts, fiction and didactic literature, bhakti texts, and passages scattered in systematized sastra. It is more difficult to discern in dharmasāstra and philosophical sūtras, though we have seen it in the Yogasūtras, Brahmasūtras, and the Madanamahārṇava. Both classical texts and modern ethnographies suggest that possession was common as a way of thinking in Indian culture and performance. It is perhaps no accident that possession, so noticeable in the Vedas and epics but sporadic in first-millennium canonical literature, surfaced widely in the realm of actual human experience, as the ethnographic literature attests. The local traditions, often derided by the educated elite in both India and the West for their nonvedic practices, are very possibly the most “vedic” of all Indian traditions. This may be said as well for the North Indian bhakti traditions, which are often local traditions repositioned in brahmanical settings. Before the Veda of the Mīmāṃsakas became the guiding light of orthodoxy and began to enjoin and shape human religious experience and concern from its own self-representation, a broad spectrum of religious experiences and concerns existed regionally and locally, as they do today, many of which might be recognizable in the Vedas but were later expunged from the vedic orthodoxy’s catalogue of central concerns.

This reflects a process that might be called “vernacularization,” in which elite traditions reach into local practice to keep themselves afloat. This would constitute the obverse of the oft-discussed “Sanskritization.” Sanskrit literature does not identify, at least in what I have been able to locate, a “vernacular” norm of ritual that keeps the Sanskrit performative ideologies alive. However, just as Sanskritization conferred prestige and legitimacy on local practices and traditions, vernacularization legitimated the Sanskritic enterprise by localizing it, which is to say by injecting elements of local culture into it. This is evident in the Ṛgveda, the Atharvaveda, the MBh, the Purāṇas, and the Tantras.42 Although I have not been able to find in Sanskrit literature the richness of detail that modern ethnographic description brings to bear on possession ritual—for example, Hiltebeitel’s observations on the “paraphernalia of possession,”43 in which he records the use of an ankle-bracelet rattle (cilampu), hourglass-shaped drum (uṭukkai), whip (viracātti), trident (vīrakuntam; Skt. triśūla) portable pennant (koṭicilai), firepost (akkiṉkampam; Skt. agniskambham), clay pot (karakam), and lemon-tipped sword in Draupadī cult possession in Tamilnadu—I expect that increased study of mid-second-millennium Tantras and tantric prayogas, most still in manuscript form (such as those discussed in Chapter 11), will uncover more of this. Returning to Lariviere’s point discussed in Chapter 1, it is not so much that better critical editions of well-known texts are crucial in revealing a more accurate picture of the lives of subalterns, as if brahmans systematically exorcised such material from their texts (which I do not believe they did). Rather, the more important enterprise is examining manuscripts that may be unclassified by the orthodoxy among both Western-style scholars and sāstraically oriented paṇḍitas. This territory remains surprisingly uncharted. The sorts of issues that Davidson has dealt with in his study of esoteric Buddhism and I have addressed in Chapter 11 may be replicated or enhanced through attending to such unstudied texts and ritual ephemera.

It is often said that Christ would not recognize or approve of Christianity as it is practiced today. Similarly, the vedic seers would probably be more at home with any one of a number of devotional and ecstatic sects that arose in India than with the philosophically rigorous and repressive orthodoxies that were established in their name.44 These devotional and ecstatic sects find common ground with the Vedas in their appeal to the viability, safety, and sanctity of individual experience; what they subvert is the institutional authority of the Vedas. Jack Miles, a biographer of Jesus, writes, with reference to American Christianity, that “the social viability of religion for the many depends significantly on the intellectual viability of religion for the few.”45 This statement finds resonance with religion in ancient and classical India. The supposition of the intellectual and religious elite that an ounce of theology is sufficient to legitimize or spawn a pound of popular movements certainly has merit, but it may not be as true as the reverse: that broadly based and socially viable religious movements force on an orthodoxy an additional, and often awkwardly integrated, ounce of theology. As vedic orthodoxies recast themselves as Purāṇic or tantric, they were forced to support the legitimacy of deity and spirit possession, at least in practice. But this support was indirect; it occurred in the interstices and at the margins, through absorption and consequent prescription, rather than through argument. Thus, it appears to have been an effort of liberals among the orthodox to remain on the cutting edge of popular culture through ontological outreach even if they rarely extended enough epistemological rope to draw the fringes into mainstream Sanskritic philosophical systems. In short, orthodoxy in India has a history of finding ways to accommodate, express, and sanction that which is outside what is normally orthodox as well as that which is orthodox in the extreme, in this case the recognition and validation of forms of possession.

In sum, it is highly inadvisable to essentialize the phenomenon of possession. As the foregoing discussion demonstrates, possession in South Asia is not just one thing. Amid this shifting ground, however, we can with some certainty assert the following.

1. Whatever may have been the origins of possession in India—it would be fruitless and incorrect to posit its origin in a single event, locality, or religious complex—it has become perhaps the region’s most wide-spread form of spiritual expression, with a vibrant presence in semi-public divinatory practice and public festival.
2. Possession is sharply divided between positive oracular possession and negative disease-producing possession. The two have occasionally converged, as literary and ethnographic evidence over several millennia amply testifies.
3. Both positive and negative possession are commonly believed to have a moral source. In the case of negative possession, the “mistake” might occur unwittingly. Negative possession is attributed to pollution, contact with evil or degraded people, or being unprotected while in terrifying environments (such as burning grounds or deep jungle). More generally, it is believed that women and children, who are regarded as weaker than men, are more susceptible to possession. Positive possession, by contrast, may be attributed to virtuous action (including action from past births), successful devotional practice, properly performed ritual, or divine grace.
4. Possession cannot be reduced to a single descriptive prototype, but is a complex phenomenon characterized by terms that convey broad semantic possibilities. These can be distinguished through close linguistic study.
5. Possession is always to some extent disruptive and almost always in some sense violent. The disruptiveness occurs in every form of possession, from ecstatic initiatory possession to oracular possession to disease-producing possession. The violence is often expressed as rage (raudra). On occasion, however, possession can be peaceful (śānta).
6. Acceptance of the ontological and substantive reality of spirits and deities has always been widespread in South Asia, as it has been in most societies in which the dominant scientific paradigm(s) differ from the one developed and accepted in the West since the Renaissance (hence, the stance of Western scholarship toward the subject). Thus, the South Asian literary and psychological universe has always been inhabited by innumerable spirits and deities. In spite of occasional orthodox efforts to excise possession from mainstream discourse, it is inevitable that a belief so widespread would find its way into Sanskrit texts.
7. Possession has a strong horizontal and vertical presence in Indian society. Although it has a vigorous presence in women’s religion, it is by no means limited to women or to members of any particular class or caste, linguistic grouping, or economic stratum.
8. Possession in South Asia is so varied, multivocal, and ubiquitous—it arises as a result of a large number of possible physical, mental, social, moral, and psychological circumstances—that it is inadvisable to offer a grand theory of possession, in spite of certain consistencies in its narrative logic.

### Bringing It All Back Home: The Mahābhārata and Traditions of Possession
As pointed out earlier, most Indic possession can be spun from the MBh: from the tales of two kings, Nala and Kalmāṣapāda, who experienced very different kinds of possession; from the story of Asvatthāman, arguably the most heinous villain in an epic with an outsized cast of reprehensible characters; from the protective possession of Ruci by Vipula Bhārgava, the composed and dutiful, yet inscrutably uncertain, pupil of the powerful sage Devaśarman; and from the tale of the birth of Skanda, which for millennia has served as the exemplar for certain demonologies in āyurvedic and tantric texts and, doubtless, in popular culture as well. Fictional though these characters may be, they connect directly to enduring features of South Asian religious and narrative culture, both Sanskritic and non-Sanskritic. Possession by the Skandas, the bālagrahas or childsnatchers, or other allied invasive agents of negative possession are not addressed further here, as I have dealt with them sufficiently. Nor do I address further the topic of possession identified as escalation of emotional engagement, except to emphasize, first, that it too can be traced in considerable measure to epic discourse and, second, that devotional possession, a form of intense emotional engagement that has its origins in a culture of mixed classicism, folk religion, and a probable early layer of shamanistic practice, has been explained in Sanskritic and certain folk cultures in terms of Sanskritic aesthetic categories.

Instead, we close by revisiting some of the primary characters depicted in MBh tales of possession. In the final analysis, the trauma of Nala’s possession was absorbed largely by himself and Damayantī, as he eventually regained his kingdom, reputation, and status, and everyone lived happily ever after, albeit with greater wisdom and maturity; Asvatthaman’s and Kalmāṣapāda’s possessions were malevolent, even viciously so; while Vipula’s possession emerged as a challenging if sanguine act of service to his guru. All four possessions were violent, though in the fourth, that of Vipula, the violence was veiled, assuming the forms of threat and intimidation. Nala’s possession was destructive to his personal and professional life—he lost his wife, his kingdom, his wealth, his identity and self-esteem, and, eventually, as part of a violent exorcism, his body, too, became disfigured and unrecognizable. Yet Asvatthāman, through the most gruesomely violent possession, became more distinctly himself, his genetic links to Śiva, Death (antaka), Lust (kāma), and Anger (krodha) emerging conspicuously. Kalmāṣapāda, bidden by the possessing rākṣasa Kiṃkara to indulge in compulsive cannibalism, suffered a possession potentially more lethal to himself than even Nala’s. Eclipse of the self, its erasure through violence or extreme disruption, marks all these possessions. This is similar to the oracular possession recorded by ethnographers throughout South Asia as well as in disease-producing possession recorded from the Atharvaveda to Caraka and Susruta to modern āyurvedic and nonmedical healing practice (e.g., at Bālājī or Chottanikkara).

With the self now cast into doubt, I return to the epigraph from Shulman that opened this chapter, regarding the preferability of a self. Let us inquire what kind of a self he is talking about and whether it is a viable option for the possessed or is possible only for the dispossessed, which is to say, for one whose identity is not under assault, who has not experienced the disruptive openness of possession, who has not struggled with competing voices or personalities, or with the visceral attractiveness of extreme dissociation. Shulman continues his inquiry into the possibility of a self, identifying it as “[s]omething minimally integrated and not wholly discontinuous, where memory, or its more powerful and personal multiform, forgetting, could reside. Something to hide and veil, if need be, in the interests of preserving ultimacy in some residual, individual form. Even a fictive self might do.”46

Although I acknowledge the question of fictive selves, which many, including some of India’s most important philosophers, would argue is the only self we have, it is more pressing at this point to return to Nala, Shulman’s immediate concern: to his loss of self through possession by Kali, the personification of the worst of times, and his eventual emergence “from the shadowy mirror-state to a kind of personhood.”47 Nala’s personality, including his sense of his self, which is to say, his self-possession, was, compared to that of many of the other epic characters, arguably underdeveloped. As the narrative analogue to the Pāṇḍava king Yudhiṣṭhira, he was dharma incarnate, warts and all, his tenuous control over his personal life mirroring Dharmaraja’s ironic moniker “steady in battle” (yudhi-sthira). Nala became truly human only after his harrowing adventure with Kali, brought about, we might recall, by a breach in an ostensibly minor matter of ritual purity. Before his trifling but egregious slip-up, his persona was the very incarnation of rectitude and righteousness; he was, above all, an advertisement for the safety of uncomplicated virtue. With the onset of his possession by Kali, however, he morphed into a man troubled and lost, demonstrating the decisiveness of possession and the fragility of such uncomplicated virtue. We see a tenderness in his love for Damayantī slipping through the cracks in his possession, as he quietly tears himself away from her in the dark forest night, stealing loving glances at her while abandoning her, he believes, for her own good. Although he is archetypally the royal (and regal) hero, his heroism and capacity for self-possession matures only after he is forced to confront his own personal demon. His road to recovery, however, is unexpectedly medical. Bitten by the Nāga king Karkoṭaka, whose poison slowly weakens the grip of the entropic Kali, Nala eventually vomits him out.48 This is quite different from the norm in the MBh in which, for example, King Kalmāṣapāda’s possession by a vicious rākṣasa was cured by ensorcelled water sprinkled on him by the ṛṣi Vasiṣṭha. In āyurvedic terms, Nala was cured through scientific or rational treatment (yuktivyapāśrayacikitsā), even if the curative agent, poison, was administered by a nāga, while King Kalmāṣapāda was cured through ritual means (daivavyapāśrayacikitsā).

The connection of Āyurveda with nāgas is vouchsafed in the myth of the “churning of the ocean of milk” (samudramanthana; MBh 1.16). In this famous story, the mighty serpent Vāsuki served as the rope wrapped around Mount Mandara, which served as the vertical churning wood (araṇi), placed on the back of the tortoise king Akupāra, who served as the lower flat churning wood. The serpentine rope was pulled at opposite ends by the devas and the asuras in their efforts to churn out the much-sought-after elixir of immortality (amṛta). Eventually, Dhanvantari, the legendary founder and patron saint of Āyurveda, was produced, holding the vessel with the elixir.49 Regardless of the fact that celestial bedlam ensued, the connection was secured, thus conferring rationale to Karkoṭaka’s gift of the poisonous healing elixir.

In addition, we see several links in these stories to possession as it has been textually represented and popularly practiced. Although Nala’s possession may be insufficiently remarked on in what has become a popular romance and narrative of devotion,50 the cure, at least, reflects popular and āyurvedic practice, where vomiting, induced by mildly poisonous substances (e.g., white śaṅkhapuṣpi mixed with milk), is employed in Kerala as part of exorcistic practice. Possession here becomes Nala’s physical disability, which empowers the spirit of the waters to produce, out of itself, an antibiotic. The exorcism for King Kalmāṣapāda, by contrast, works in the opposite direction. Rather than seeking the spirits of the deep for a cure, he is cured by the sages, which is to say, from above rather than below. The realm of ritual is the domain of the sages, while the realm of medicine is, by association, the domain of the nāgas.

Turning to Asvatthaman’s possession, its cultural continuity is vouchsafed in its performance in the annual Draupadī festivals in Tamilnadu. The actors transform the violence and devastation of Asvatthaman’s deadly march through the Pāṇḍava army into a victory march, as Draupadī leads her troops across burning coals in a remarkable display of ecstatic fire-walking. The cultural sense of Asvatthaman’s mythic violence is reduced to its most recognizable and resonant culture significator—pure focused intensity—and is transformed into a blissful and liberating experience of possession.

In Vipula’s case, the link is to initiatory possession. It is uncertain whether Vipula’s ability to possess other people was part of an initiatory practice, like that seen much later in the northern and eastern tantric material. The process employed by Vipula (he entered his limbs and face into hers, remaining within her, unmoving, invisible, like a shadow) is, as we have seen, strongly reminiscent of the descriptions of “transfer of essence” from father to son when the father is approaching death (BĀU 1.5.17, Kauṣītaki Upaniṣad 2.14). It also closely resembles the later descriptions by the commentators on Yogasūtras 3.38 on the physical processes necessary to engineer possession, as well as on Hemacandra’s description of possession in the Jain Yogaśāstra. Thus, this kind of yogic possession has both mythic and practical foundations, giving it the basic requirements and appearance of a “tradition.”

Thus, possession casts extreme doubt on the viability of the socially constructed individual, as he or she swings from bliss and integration to terror and fragmentation, an alternation of saṃyoga and viprayoga, unity and separation, recognition and alienation, as the bhakti saints would see it. The problem refuses to go away and is presented afresh in each generation. Perhaps the central insight of possession is the recognition and acceptance of self as other, an insight that also casts doubt on the psychoanalytic project of reclaiming submerged parts of the self as an exercise in regaining wholeness, as Shulman reminds us.51 Although this project is to a great extent shared by Indian philosophers, who have theorized it through adopting and adapting the associative thinking of the Vedas, it can be successful only after dispersion and alienness are recognized as facts of life. Convergences can be anticipated, even guided, idealized, and perhaps achieved in a grand reconciliation of self-possession. But the difficult, perhaps irreconcilable, problem remains the acceptance of one’s own multivocality.

### NOTES
1. Trans. van Buitenen 1975:335.
2. To the best of my knowledge, no text actively distinguishes samāveśa from samādhi. The former, it appears, indicates blissful pervasion by an external force, while the latter, in the Yogasūtras, the key text that defines it, suggests an internal pervasion that transcends relation.
3. Many other equivalent passages are found in the Yoga Upaniṣads; see the edition by A. Mahadeva Sastri.
4. See Brown 1921:153ff. for further references.
5. Cf. Csordas 1990.
6. See the articles by Koller, Larson, and Dissanayake in Kasulis et al. 1993. These articles, which do little more than examine well-known canonical doctrines, abundantly reveal the truth of Gombrich’s observations often cited here that “brahmanism inculcates control.”
7. Dissanayake 1993:39–40.
8. Staal 1993:71. See also Goodman 1990, who makes a strong case for a positive correlation between physical posture, spirit or deity possession, and states of altered consciousness.
9. The body as conceptualized in the ṚV and in India in general, as we have seen, occupied a surprisingly liminal space. Based on his analysis of the afterlife in the ṚV, Reat notes, “in Vedic thought the most essential element of the human being is his individual identity, which resides primarily in the quasi-material tanū” (1990:63). (In spite of the general absence of historical and linguistic surety in this book, Reat’s observations on tanū, at least, are sound.) This individual identity is a composite entity called ātmán in the ṚV and Yajurveda Saṃhitās. This is to be distinguished from the ātman of the Upaniṣads, where it becomes the microcosmic equivalent of the absolute brahman.
10. Staal 1993. His writing on ritual (e.g., 1983, 1990a) also demonstrates this point.
11. Tambiah speaks of Western “notions of bounded self and atomistic individualism” (1990:133) opposing the more fluid, transactional, and interactional notions of the self in Indian thought. On “fluidity” of the self in India, see Daniel 1984.
12. See the discussion in Chapter 2 on the equal attraction of possession performance to ethnographers and enculturated peoples.
13. Cf., e.g., Kakar 1982:238ff.; Koller 1993:52ff.
14. Cf. Heesterman’s felicitous statement on the Vedic ritualist’s conception of the universe: “In this world of floating forms there are no hard and fast lines; conceptually different entities and notions interchange with bewildering ease. All things, entities, notions, powers, are connected with each other. Nevertheless this world is not the chaos it appears to be at first sight. The point at issue for the Vedic thinker is not to disentangle and differentiate conceptually different entities and notions but to realize, to know, their connections” (1957:6). See also Chapter 5, n. 80.
15. This corporeal liminality is seemingly built into the Vedic language itself. Gonda observes with respect to the enigmatic power expressed by the word bráhman that it belongs to a type of Indo-European terminology that blurs the distinction between “nomen actionis and nomen rei” (1950:72), that is between action and object. This blurring, which is in fact a blurring of identity, is a characteristic of Vedic thought, and it is most visible in bandhutās such as these.
16. Cf. Csordas 1990:1ff.
17. Cf. Gupta and Ferguson 1992 for the related term, “free-floating monad.”
18. Marriott and Inden 1977; see also Marriott 1990.
19. Appadurai 1986:755.
20. Cf. Swami Vivekananda’s “vedāntafication” of the Ramakrishna Mission, amply demonstrated in Kripal 1995. See also Appadurai, who, summarizing Ashis Nandy’s argument (1983), writes that Swami Vivekananda “largely succumbed to the androcentric, linear, protestant, and activist strands in the dominant colonial culture” (1986:748).
21. Gupta 1995:10.
22. Robinet 1993:103.
23. Eck 1993:59.
24. Ibid.:59–60.
25. Ibid.:60.
26. Jung 1990:495, cited by Glucklich 1997:53.
27. Glucklich 1997:53.
28. See also Orsi: “Western styles of knowledge, which typically give priority to detachment over engagement, to textuality over vocality, to mind over body, are to be exposed to radically different ways of constructing and inhabiting reality” (2001:109). This, he asserts, runs counter to the priorities of the “once-dominated” and “once-oppressed” other. Doubtless this is largely true. However, one of the facets of Indian orthodoxy is that this allegedly Western style of knowledge is also true of it, though one may argue that the facets of Indian orthodoxy that interested Christian-inspired Western intellectuals were the ones most framed in this manner. The reliance of mainstream brahmanical śāstra on reason and logic appealed to Western intellectuals, especially the discourses of Nyāya, Vedānta, and Theravada Buddhism. Poetics (alaṃkāraśāstra) was taken slightly less seriously, as was Purāṇa, and, of course, Tantra and bhakti literature. All of these were more embodied, vocal, and engaged, and were it not for the intriguing character of their antiquity, most of the vedic literature would have met with the same fate, as the oft-cited derogatory comments of Max Müller, Julius Eggeling, and others testify. For these, see Tull 1989, ch. 1.
29. Cf. Kjaerholm, who states: “We do not really believe that a person can be possessed by spirits or the devil or what have you. Although this was a common belief in medieval Europe it is not generally held now, certainly not by social scientists” (1982:184).
30. See Bynum 2001, which examines twelfth- and thirteenth-century narratives of metamorphosis and hybridity.
31. Recall Varahamihira’s warning (Chapter 11) to astrologers against the use of possession.
32. Yocum 1982:193.
33. Kripal 1995:271. Kripal does not distinguish between possession and ecstatic vision (72, passim). The Kathāmṛta 4.232 contains “a self-description of how the saint’s ecstatic states used to possess him like ghosts until he finally could expel them out through his bowels” (Kripal 1995:335).
34. Bhattacharyya (1986) also demonstrates this in her work on cultural configurations of insanity.
35. I have used the word “intermedial” for this state; see F. Smith 2004.
36. In spite of the active participation of brahmans in non-brahmanic possession ritual, certain artifacts of brahmanical inhibitions remain in their performance. William Sax informs me that the bodies of low-caste people in possession gyrate more wildly than those of upper-caste members.
37. Bynum 2001:31.
38. Thus Gombrich can argue that “both brahmanism and Buddhism oppose possession and commend self-control, while the communal religion of the Sinhalese, as of the Indian, village centres, and has probably always centred, on a cult of local deities whose priests become possessed and so act as mediums to help villagers solve their problems” (1988:145).
39. Humphrey and Laidlaw see this at work in contemporary India as well, in the Jain stance towards emotional engagement in religious practice. They write, “The more puritan of our informants disapproved of [episodes of emotional engagement], in the same way, one imagines, that ‘enthusiasm’ was frostily dismissed in the eighteenth-century Church of England” (1994:228).
40. Pollock 1990:333.
41. Biardeau 1989a:21–22.
42. White discusses “vernacular ritual strategies” in his undated and not yet published paper. This is not quite identical to what I am positing here, but the article presents more evidence of the influence of “vernacular” practices on Sanskrit textuality, thus broadening the perimeters of Sanskritic culture beyond what many, including Pollock, might contend. This effectively broadens the discourse of power in Sanskritic culture, reshaping at least these elements of it to reach beyond the Mīmāṃsā-laden orthodoxy.
43. Hiltebeitel 1989b:450. We might also here consider Haberman’s description (1988:98ff., 137ff.) of male practitioners of rāgānugabhakti sadhana who wear women’s clothes. This is not mentioned in any Sanskrit text before the eighteenth century, but its presence as part of the local tradition supports and strengthens Rūpa Gosvāmī’s textuality of this sādhana in the Bhaktirasāmṛtasindhu.
44. Thus, textual, performative, and religious traditions like those arising out of the Nāṭyaśāstra and certain Purāṇas and Tantras, as well as vernacular literatures expressing the same human religious concerns, may thus be correct in envisioning themselves as the fifth Veda. On this, see F. Smith 1994.
45. Miles 1997:59.
46. Shulman 1994:1.
47. Ibid.:25.
48. See the descriptions of the nāga in Chapter 12, from bhutavidyā accounts in Sanskrit and Tibetan medical texts. These, however, do not square with what we have here. This is not the place to enter into a study of nāgas; it is sufficient to note that they occupy a place of great importance in the MBh. Generally, they are depicted as water spirits who also possess the secrets of the earth. They are alternately dangerous, poisonous, and helpful, with a reputation for divination. They may be exotic serpents or half-human and half-serpent (as appears to be the case here). In Tibet the iconography is somewhat clearer. There a nāga is typically depicted with a divination arrow and a jewel in its hands (cf. Nebesky-Wojkowitz 1956:305).
49. The story is much less complete in the Rāmāyaṇa; cf. Rām 144.15ff., esp. verse 18, and Goldman 1984:210 and notes.
50. Cf. Wadley 1999. This is perhaps not so odd, as the peripheral nature of this episode (ākhyāna) to the main action of the epic renders this aspect of it dispensable. Nor is it depicted in Draupadī epic performances in Tamilnadu or Garhwal. Neither Nala nor Damayantī are mentioned by Hiltebeitel in his Draupadī volumes or by Sax in Dancing the Self. As mentioned earlier, the Jain story of Nala excises the possession completely; he is an archetypal good king who ends up renouncing the world.
51. Shulman 1994:27.
 