+++
title = "२७ मूलमन्त्राधिकारः"

+++

(27) THE CHAPTER ON THE MūLA_MANTRA_

(AṢṬĀKṢARA) page404

SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_:

तारं पूर्वं तदनु हृदयं तच्च नारायणाये-

त्याम्नायोक्तं पदमवयतां सार्धमाचार्यदत्तम् ।  
अङ्गीकुर्वन्नलसमनसामात्मरक्षाभरन्नः  
क्षिप्रं देवः क्षिपतु निखिलान् किङ्करैश्वर्यविघ्नान् ॥ ५९ ॥

(1) THE GOD OF THE _MANTRA_:

Of us who, with a knowledge of its meaning, are meditating on the _mantra_ taught to us by our ācharya which consist of the _praṇava_ (_aum_) at the beginning with the word _namas_ (_namo_) and then the word Nārāyanāya revealed in the Vedas - of us who are not competent to adopt other _upāya_s and the responsibility of redeeming whose souls has been accepted by our Lord, May He dispel very soon all those obstacles (past _karma_ ) which stand in the way of our enjoying the imperial bliss of service to Him!.

(2) THE SEER WHO REVEALED THE _MANTRA_:

कल्याणमावहतु कार्तयुगं स्वधर्मं प्रख्यापयन् प्रणिहितेषु नरादिकेषु ।  
आद्यं कमप्यधिगतो रथमष्टचक्रं बन्धुस्सतां बदरिकाश्रमतापसो नः ॥ ६०॥

May that great seer dwelling in the hermitage of Badarika ( Nārāyaṇa ), the friend of (all ) good men, who occupies a certain chariot called _Mūlamantra_ with (its eight syllables as ) its eight wheels and who instructs his reverent pupils, Nara and others (Nārada  and the like) in the _dharma_ concerning himself which is characteristic of Krita Yuga - may that great seer confer (His) blessing on us !

(3) THE _MANTRA_:

यदन्तस्थमशेषेण वाङ्मयं वेदवैदिकं ।  
तस्मै व्यापकमुख्याय मन्त्राय महते नमः ॥ ६१ ॥

Let us adore that great _mantra_, the most important of the  _vyāpaka_ _mantra_s[^80] , within which lies embedded the gist of all the revealed truths found in the _śruti_s and the _smṛti_s without any exception.

[^80]: The three _mantra_s Namo Nārāyaṇaya, Namo Bhagavate Vāsudevāya, and Namo Viṣṇave, with the _Praṇava_ (AUM) preceding each are called _vyāpaka_ _mantra_s for they have the words, Nārāyaṇa, _Vāsudeva_ and _Viṣṇu_, which by their etymology, convey the meaning 'Omnipresent' or 'all pervading' (_vyāpaka_).

(4) THE DISCIPLE WHO HAS BEEN INITIATED INTO THE MEANING OF THE _MANTRA_ BY THE GRACE OF THE _GURU_:

इह मूलमन्त्रसंवृतमर्थमशेषेण कश्चिदनुभवति ।  
स्फटिकतलनिहितनिधिमिव देशिकदत्तेन चक्षुषा जन्तुः ॥ ६२ ॥

Here a being who has been blessed by his _guru_ with vision sees all the meaning concealed within the _mūlamantra_, without any exception, as if it is a treasure placed underneath a plate made of crystal.[^81]

[^81]: Commentators say that there is here an implied reference also to the author himself who obtained all his knowledge concerning the mūla _mantra_ from his _ācārya_, _Śrī_ Appullar.

THE PURPORT OF THE THREE _MANTRA_S AND THEIR

RELATION TO ONE ANOTHER:

So far we have explained the most essential truths which every sātvika should remember and established them on a firm basis (of authority (_pramāṇa_) and argument). We will now proceed to show in what ways, in the three great mysteries (_mantra_s) which reveal all these (truths), the words and the sentences should be construed (in order that their meanings may be properly understood).

Among them, the first, namely, Tiru_mantra_ (_aṣṭākṣara_) helps us to understand such things as our essential nature, (_svarūpa_) which finds true happiness only in being the _śeṣa_ of the Supreme Being. By that (revelation), it creates a longing for the Supreme Goal of attainment preceded by the removal of all obstacles thereto and also a feeling of urgency (tvarā) (in regard to that attainment) whereby the competency for the adoption of the _upāya_ (_prapatti_) becomes perfected. _Dvaya_ reveals clearly the manner in which this particular _upāya_ should be adopted by this adhikārī with an antecedent longing for the fruit thereof. The _carama_ _śloka_ enjoins (as a _vidhi_) the adoption of this _upāya_. Though it is possible to find all these truths in each of these three _mantra_s by itself, from the words themselves and from the sense

suggested by them (ārtha ), yet each of these three has a primary aim (which is different from that of the others). In the Tiru _mantra_, the first syllable ( a ) in the first word ( _aum_) expresses, in a concise form, the Supreme Reality who is the Protector or Saviour; in the middle word (_namas_ ) (_namo_) and the third word (Nārāyanāya ) are to be understood respectively the _upāya_ (_prapatti_) and the Upeya (the end or goal, viz., service to Nārāyaṇa ); what is stated briefly (in the Tiru_mantra_) is made clear in _Dvaya_. (1) The word prapadye in _Dvaya_ indicates the particular kind of adhikāri (namely, one who is destitute of other _upāya_s - _akiñcana_) by the first person singular and (2) the needlessness of other _upāya_s, is inferred from the sense, and (so also) (3) the disappearance of the hindrances to the goal is implicit in the last word _namas_, The _Carama_-_śloka_ explains distinctly these (three things), (that are only hinted at in the _Dvaya_ ). These three (_mantra_s) are to us (men destitute of other _upāya_s), maintenance, nourishment and enjoyment (of the fruit), being, respectively, the causes of knowledge (_jñāna_ ), practice or adoption (anushtāna ) and the end or fruit (of our endeavour.)

It has been said: "The God, Nārāyaṇa, who is perfect in the possession of the six attributes is certainly in the form of _aṣṭākṣara_ in the mouths of those who utter the _mantra_," So, from the tongue of the _ācārya_, it dispels the darkness (ignorance) in the cave of the disciple's heart and makes him realise his pure and essential nature, which finds bliss only in being the _śeṣa_ of the Supreme Being. Since it gives (in this manner) real (spiritual) existence to him, the Tiru_mantra_ is his maintenance (dhāraka). The _carama_ _śloka_ is the cause of his advancement in the particular kind of knowledge which would enable him to adopt the final _upāya_ (_prapatti_). It is the final word as a precept or instruction concerning the _upāya_, omitting nothing that should be learnt. Therefore the _Carama_ _śloka_ is his nourishment (poṣaka). _Dvaya_ is the cause of the attainment of the Supreme Goal of existence by a single utterance of it and enables a person by constant meditation to feel that he has attained his object. Therefore _Dvaya_ is an object of enjoyment (bhogya).

THE PRIMARY IMPORTANCE OF TIRU_MANTRA_:

Among these three _mantra_s), in regard to Tiru_mantra_, the seer, (rishi), the metre (chandas) the god revealed by it, (devata), the germ (_bīja_), the potency (_śakti_), the colour (_varṇa_), the application (viniyoga), the locality (sthāna) and nyāsa should be learnt from the respective kalpas and traditions (sampradaya). The greatness and glory of Tiru_mantra_ are well known froin Upaniṣads like Atharvana and Kaṭha, from s'astras like that of Manu, and from various kalpas like Nārāyanātmaka Hairaṇyagarbha kalpa, Nāradīya kalpa and Bodhāyanīya kalpa.

It has been said :-"Of "all _mantra_s, the _mantra_s treating of _Bhagavān_ are the highest. Of the countless _mantra_s treating of _Bhagavān_, the three vyāpaka _mantra_s are the highest, so also the eternal _mūlamantra_ is the highest of all _mantra_s ; of all secrets, this is the supreme secret; of all things that purify, this is the most purificatory". So it is the highest among the three vyāpaka _mantra_s; it is the essence of all the Vedas; it is capable of removing all evil influences; it is the means of obtaining all the objects desired by men; it helps in the adoption of all _upāya_s; it can be uttered by all castes, either in its Vedic form (with _aum_) or in its tantric form (without the _aum_), in accordance with their respective competence; it reveals, in no uncertain terms, all the reals (_tattva_s), both those that are pervaded by _Bhagavān_ and that which pervades all (viz the Supreme Self); it does not require the help or aid of any other _mantra_ and is common to all the forms of _Bhagavān_ (like _Śrī_ Rāma, _Śrī_ Kṛṣṇa and so on)[^82] . Owing to these reasons, all _ācārya_s delight in it. The Alvars, too, sing its praise with delight in the following passages -- " Having learnt Thy holy _mantra_ with eight syllables", "Those who have been initiated by the _ācārya_ into the _mantra_ with eight syllables and utter it with the proper _niṣṭhā_ are capable of ruling over _Vaikuṇṭha_", " Those who constantly delight in the _mantra_ with eight syllables and utter it become capable of ruling over _Vaikuṇṭha_", "You were devotees that sang the name of the Lord saying "Namo Nārāyanāya" so that country and town might understand" and "By uttering the holy name Namo Nārāyaṇāya in the proper way (i.e.) without seeking any material gain" etc, etc. The seers (rishis) too, have declared as follows:- "Many were the great seers like Sanaka who attained the abode of _Viṣṇu_ by uttering the _Aṣṭākṣara_", "Just' as among the deities there is no one superior to Nārāyaṇa, there is, among the _mantra_s, no _mantra_ superior to the _Aṣṭākṣara_"; "Raising my hand and swearing that it is true, I declare this to you! O my children and my disciples, listen. There is no _mantra_ superior to the _mantra_ of eight syllables. Adore _Bhagavān_ with it always. Show your devotion to Him with it, and worship Him with it. Those who show their devotion to Him by looking upon this _mantra_ as supreme will never perish (i. e. will not be in _Samsāra_.)" and "Sitting, or lying down, or standing anywhere, we have adopted only the _mantra_, Namo Nārāyanāya as our _upāya_."

[^82]: They may all be worshipped with the utterance of the mūla_mantra_, whereas other _mantra_s are to be used only in connection with particular forms.

The Supreme Ruler had this _mantra_ taught to Puṇḍarīka by Nārada ; he received it as his supreme good; and as stated in the _śloka_ ; " Puṇḍarīka "whose mind was ever bent on _dharma_ understood that, of all things to be attained, Nārāyaṇa was the highest and attained _mukti_ by uttering the _mantra_ with eight syllables : Namo Nārāyaṇāya". He practised this _mantra_ and

obtained release from _samsāra_. The supreme Ruler, Himself, initiated Tirum_aṅga_i Alvar into this _mantra_,

IT MAY BE UTTERED BY ALL WITH THE OMISSION OF

THE PRAŅAVA AND THE SUFFIX OF THE

FOURTH CASE AT THE END:

When this _mantra_ is taken without the _praṇava_ (at the beginning) and the dative suffix at the end of Nārāyaṇa (i. e.) (as Namo Nārāyaṇa), every one is competent to utter it. This may be seen from the Varāha purāna in the context of the sanctity of Kaiśika Dvādaśī, where it is said : " (Nampaduvan), who was of the caste that eat dog's flesh, came back after pronouncing the words: Namo Nārāyaņa". It may also be evident from the following Tamil verses: “When the name of _Bhagavān_ is uttered, one should say Namo Nārāyaṇa ", " Having obtained this excellent garland called Namo Nārāyaṇa etc" and " there is certainly a tongue in the mouth and there is certainly also the _mantra_ called Namo Nāraņa" which should be uttered at a single breath".

To Brahmins and the like (Kṣatriyas), the _mantra_ consists of eight syllables including the _praṇava_ just as it occurs in the Veda. It has been stated: "Karma[^83] is said, in the ocean of nectar called _Pāñcarātra_, to be of three kinds: to Brahmins _karma_  is Vaidic (i.e.) to be performed with Vedic _mantra_s; to Kshatrias, _karma_  is both Vaidic and tantric; to Vaiśyas and Śūdras _karma_  is tantric; or _karma_  may be tantric to all. Aṣṭākṣara, (the _mantra_ with eight syllables), _Dvādaśākṣara_ (the _mantra_ with twelve syllables _Namo Bhagavate Vāsudevāya_ with the _praṇava_ at the beginning) and the _Ṣaḍakṣara_ (the _mantra_ with six syllables, _Namo Viṣṇave_ with the _praṇava_ at the beginning) - these are the principal _mantra_s of _Viṣṇu_ whose splendour is beyond all measure. These _mantra_s with the _praṇava_ ( at the beginning) are Vaidika _mantra_s; without the _praṇava_ they are Tântric _mantra_s. To women and Śūdras the utterance of the _Mūlamantra_ should be without the dative suffix (of the word Nārāyaṇa). So also there is, for them, no svara, no _praṇava_ nor _aṅga_nyāsa or other rules. To them the utterance of the mere _mantra_ (without _praṇava_ ) is enjoined." In accordance with this, it has been stated further: "The syllable a in the latter part of the word Nārāyaṇa (i.e.) ayana denotes _Viṣṇu_. If the nasal sound of the vowel m (anuswāra) at the end of the word ayanam be added to it, it becomes am and this 'a with the m becomes the germ (_bīja_) of mūlamantra. By this addition, the _mantra_ comes to consist of eight letters.

[^83]: When the worship of _Viṣṇu_ is performed with only Vedic _mantra_s, it is Vaidic _karma_ ; when it is performed only with the _mantra_s found in _Pāñcarātra_, it is tantric and when it is performed with both, the _karma_  is said to be both Vaidic and tantric.

Even without the _praṇava_, these adhikārīs (women and Śūdras) obtain the same fruit or goal and this may be seen from the following _śloka_ - "Of what use are many _mantra_s for the purpose of the fruit desired? Of what use are many vratas (ascetic observances )? The _mantra_, Namo Nārāyanāya, confers all the boons that may be desired". The a in am which has been prescribed as a substitute for praṇava (_aum_) should be considered as having, in brief, all the meaning contained in _praṇava_, because the syllable a being the first letter is stated (in the _śāstra_) to denote everything in a concise form. The meaning of the syllable u in the praňava, namely, 'only' is inferred from the meaning. The ideas of knowership and the like contained in the third letter of _praṇava_, namely m should be understood as being present in the base of the second syllable of _namas_ (or _namo_), namely m.

THE MEANING OF PRAŅAVA AND ITS POTENCY:

When the _praṇava_ is used as an independent _mantra_ by itself, it may be pronounced in a single unit or instant of time (mātra), or two units of time, or three or three and a half units of time and its meanings vary in accordance with these units of time to denote either _Brahman_ as effect ( kārya ) or _Brahman_ as cause ( kāraṇa): (i. e.) when it is pronounced in a single unit of time, it means _Brahman_ with the earth as His body; when in two units, it means, _Brahman_ with the antariksha (the middle air or sky) as His body: when in three units, it means _Brahman_ with the world of _svarga_ as His body; when in three and a half units of time, it denotes _Brahman_ the Pure and the ultimate cause (of every thing). In some _śāstra_s it is said that, when the _praṇava_ begins any of the three vyāpaka _mantra_s, it should be considered as a single syllable (without any parts as a-u- m) and as denoting then the Supreme Self.

_Praṇava_ or the Veda consistiog of three letters, existed at the beginning, and the three Vedas, Rik, Yajus, and Sāman were within it (in a, u and m respectively). It should be kept as a secret. It is a Veda with three letters and is different from the other Vedas. He who knows the _praṇava_ is a Vedavit (one who knows the Veda or the three Vedas)." The greatness and glory of _praṇava_ are well known from such passages as the above. In the nyāsa_vidyā_, the _praṇava_ is an independent _mantra_ and refers to the surrender of the self, for it has been said: “The _havis_ or offering called the self should be taken with the _mantra_ beginning [^84] vasuranya and offered in the eternal fire called Acyuta with the _mantra_ called _praṇava_". For the same reason some construe it even here as denoting surrender. Others construe that the _praṇava_ should be considered in the Tiru_mantra_ only as helping to realise one's being _śeṣa_ (to the Lord), since primarily it gives knowledge of the essential nature (_svarūpa_) of the _jīva_ being _śeṣa_, If so, it contributes a qualification or element of competence for the _upāya_ (viz. praying for protection).

[^84]: The _mantra_ vasuranya in the Taittirīya Upaniṣad.

It has been said :-"By a knowledge of _Iśvara_, the devont _jīva_ attains supreme purity". When we consider _praṇava_ as giving only a knowledge of the _śeṣī_ (_Bhagavān_), 'supreme purity' would mean that it removes the unfitness of the _jīva_ for the adoption of the _upāya_. When we consider _praṇava_ as indicating a kpowledge of the _upāya_, namely, _Bhagavān_, (and not the knowledge of the seshi), 'supreme purity' would mean _mokṣa_. _Bhagavān_ Śāṇḍilya explained, as follows, the way in which the meaning of _praṇava_ should be considered:- "This Supreme Being is of such and such a nature and the _jīva_ is of such and such a nature. Yoga is said to be a knowledge of the relationship between the two (that _Iśvara_ is the seshi and the _jīva_ the _śeṣa_ )". This meaning has been elaborated as follows:-"the a (in\*_praṇava_) is _Viṣṇu_ who creates, sustains and destroys the world, the m (in it) means the _jīva_, who exists for the fulfiment of the purposes of _Viṣṇu_. The u (in it) indicates that this relationship between the two can exist only between them (and no others). So _praṇava_ which consists of three letters and is the essence of the (three) Vedas reveals this meaning." The Tamil verse which says, "I am the "servant of _Bhagavān_, the Lord of Tirukkannapuram; how am I entitled to be the servant of anyone else ?" - this Tamil verse also explains the meaning of _praṇava_. The _śrut_is and the _smṛti_s describe the three letters of _praṇava_ as the essence of the three Vedas.

THE MEANING OF A IN _PRAṆAVA_:

That these letters have these meanings will be seen from the following passage in Vamana purāna : -'By the first letter a in the _praṇava_, which is one of the members or limbs of the _mantra_ with eight letters, _Bhagavān_, who is the support of everything, is denoted; the letter a is the origin of all words and _Brahman_ is the origin of all things denoted by these words.

Therefore a denotes _Bhagavān_. He is denoted by that letter. This relationship between the letter a and _Bhagavān_ is seen from the meaning to be appropriate." _Śrī_ _Rāmānuja_ stated in the Vedārthasangraha that by the first letter (of _praṇava_) which is the origin of all words is denoted Nārāyaṇa who is the origin of all things denoted by these words. From this it follows that Bhaga van is the material and the instrumental cause of the whole world and that, as may be inferred from this, He is both omniscient and omnipotent and has other such qualities. "a means  negation (No) and when masculine denotes _Viṣṇu_". "The letter a denotes _Viṣṇu_"; " By using the letter a, which is the first name of Nārāyaṇa, what (an excellent) benedictory prayer has been made !" All this is evident from the Nighantus and the usage of scholars.

When this a denotes the Supreme Ruler, it is derived, according to the science of grammar, from the verbal root ava which means to protect, to please etc., (the termination va is dropped) and the word that results refers to one who is a protector and so on (one who pleases). Though this root has many meanings, its best-known meaning is to protect; further it is this meaning which is required here (in connection with the _mantra_ '_aum_'); besides there is no authoritative etymological explanation that it should be considered as having many meanings; so the first meaning given (in grammar), namely, to protect is the direct and primary meaning of the word and the other meanings, when required, should be considered as suggested (lukshaņā) by the primary meaning. This is the appropriate way of explaining and the ācāryas have commented on it only in this way as meaning the Protector or Saviour. As the meaning 'protector' is not restricted by any limiting adjunct, the protectorship extends to all. The manner of protection varies with the objects of protection as shown by the pramāņas (sources of knowledge). Since the protection is not stated to be based on any reason or condition, it might appear to be unconditioned (nirupādhika) but _Iśvara_, who is omnipotent and independent, expects some _vyāja_ or action prescribed by His will to be performed by the _jīva_, which would serve as a justification for conferring _mokṣa_ and the like on those who are in _samsāra_. Towards the _nitya_s ( the eternal süris) and those who have already attained _mukti_, the protection is full and complete by way of maintaining what is already present and this is the result of _Bhagavān_'s natural and unconditioned mercy. But this natural mercy (karunya) is restrained in the case of those in _samsāra_ by the condition (upādhi) of the need for punishment which has arisen by beginningless offence when actions which are displeasing to Him have occurred. _Prapatti_ and other _vyāja_s have been prescribed in the _Śāstra_s only for removing this condition which acts as a restraining force (on the Lord's (mercy).

SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_:

त्राणे स्वामित्वमौचित्यं न्यासाद्यास्सहकारिणः ।  
प्रधानहेतुस्स्वातन्त्र्यविशिष्टा करुणा विभोः ॥॥

The fact of being the Master makes it appropriate that He should proteot; _prapatti_ and the like are (only) secondary helps.The primary reason (for protecting) is the Omnipresent Lord's mercy which is not dependent upon anything else.

As stated in the _śloka_ : "In all siddhāntas and in Vedanta, it is declared that the Lord protects with His consort _Lakṣmī_, ever by His side, for she is the very embodiment of mercy", the Lord who has determined to grant redemption to all is ever ready (to do so) with His consort. The relationship with His spouse for the purpose of protection, which is evident from the pramāņas is derived (not explicitly from the words but) by inference from the purpose (of protection) which is evident from the _pramāṇa_s. Whenever _Bhagavān_ is referred to, _Lakṣmī_ should also be considered as referred to, for it results from the principle:- "If two things are enjoined as necessary, wherever one of them is mentioned, the other should also be considered as indicated” (Sanniyogasiṣṭanyāya). Thus the ācāryas, too, have said, “Since Thou(_Lakṣmī_) art ever inseparably connected with Thy Lord, even the Veda does not mention Thee separately." In all vidyās or forms of meditation (prescribed in the Upaniṣads) all qualities and attributes of _Brahman_ which define His Nature are to be meditated upon (even though only one or two of them are actually mentioned in the particular _Vidyā_). Similarly this attribute, Namely, _Lakṣmī_, who is the most important of all attributes should also be borne in mind. It is this attribute (_Lakṣmī_) which rules out other deities, (for they are not related to _Lakṣmī_ in that way) and defines _Bhagavān_'s essential nature which is not dependent upon anything else, as having an excellence which surpasses everything else, His essential nature, form and glories, which do not arise from any other source, acquire even greater splendour from the essential nature, form and glories of _Lakṣmī_, who is His attribute, and shine thereby. This may be seen in the simile; "like radiance which cannot be separated from the sun." And this has been declared by the great sages who understood the nature and person of the Supreme Deity. So also in the word Nārāyaṇa in Tiru_mantra_, Nārāyaṇa's relationship to His consort should be borne in mind. This relationship to the spouse is distinctly and explicitly stated in the _Dvaya_ (_Śrī_mat - with _Śrī_). In _Śrī_ _Rāmānuja_'s elaboration of the _Dvaya_ in his _Gadya_[^85] , it is true that, among the nārās in the words beginning with _Bhagavān_ Nārāyaṇa (Nārānām + ayanam) _Lakṣmī_ is included among the nāras by commentators. (From this it might be argued that she is also a _jīva_ like other nāras). But this inclusion is only to indicate Her dependence on Her Lord and Nāras means etymologically only “those who are related to Nara" without the specification of the form of relationship. So from that, it should not be inferred that _Lakṣmī_ is also a _jīva_.

[^85]: _Śaraṇāgati_ _Gadya_.

Here the first letter a is in the dative or fourth case singular, the (usual) dative singular suffix has been dropped. The reasons for holding that the a is in the dative singular (when no case - suffix is seen ) are as follows: (1) In the place which enjoins the surrender of the self to the Supreme Self (i.e.) the Taittirīya Upaniṣad, the _praṇava_ is prescribed as the _mantra_ (for doing so); (so it should mean 'to the Supreme Self (dative)', (2) the _mantra_ should reveal the nature of the action to be performed, (3) the self to be surrendered is seen in the third letter (m) (in _aum_) and the Supreme Brahman for whom it is surrendered is seen in the base (_prakṛti_, viz. a) of the first letter; (4) the person to whom the surrender is made and the object which is surrendered should not be in the same case. Therefore the a (which is the first letter) should be considered to be in the case (i.e.) (dative) suited to the word indicating the person to whom the surrender is made. The view of perverse interpreters (Advaitins) that a and the m (in _aum_ are in the same case (nominative or first case ) and indicate the identity in the essential nature of the _jīva_ and the Supreme Self is opposed to many _pramāṇa_s (like pratyaksha and sabda); besides it would not fit in with the natural and obvious meaning of the word _namo_ (_namas_) and the dative of the word Nārāyaṇa (i.e.) Nārāyaṇāya which are uttered along with the _praṇava_, This is obvious also from the text twhich distinguishes _praṇava_ as the bow, the self as the arrow, _Brahman_ as the target and the act of surrender as the hitting of the target (the arrow and the target cannot be identical). In the _praṇava_ in Tiru_mantra_, when the intention is the surrender of responsibility (_bharasamarpaṇam_), the dative or fourth case should be considered to have the same meaning as the dative in the _praṇava_ considered as an independent _mantra_ (i.e.) the person to whom the surrender is made. When the _praṇava_ is interpreted as indicating the essential nature (_svarūpa_) of the self which consists in existing solely for the Supreme Self (i.e.) in being _śeṣa_, the dative signifies 'having another's interests alone as one's interests'. Therefore it reveals the relationship of _śeṣa_ and _śeṣī_ which exists between the _jīva_ and the Paramātmā. We should then bear in mind that we are unconditional _śeṣa_s (nirupādhika _śeṣa_) to the Supreme Self, who is the unconditional seshi (nirupādhika seshi).

When the Lord who is the Supreme Ruler says, “You are my _śeṣa_" and pursues him, the _jīva_, owing to his egoism, tries to wriggle out saying, “ I exist only for myself." Therefore the thought that we are _śeṣa_s to the Supreme Ruler will give (spiritual) existence to the _jīva_, who is otherwise, as it were, (spiritually) non-existent. To indicate the importance of this thought that we are _śeṣa_s), the relationship to the _śeṣī_ (for a) is declared even before the mention of the _śeṣa_ (namely m the _jīva_).

SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_;

॥ निश्चिते परशेषत्वे शेषं संपरिपूर्यते । अनिश्चिते पुनस्तस्मिन्नन्यत्सर्वमसत्समम् ॥

When the relationship of our being _śeṣa_s to the Supreme Being is well established in the mind, the other requisities (for spiritual life) such as self-control and serenity (sama and dama) follow easily as being necessary to it. When that thought is not established in the mind, all the rest serve no purpose and are, as it were, non-existent.

When _Iśvara_ is the _śeṣī_ of all, He is always (to be thought of as) with His Consort, for it has been said, “The two kinds of glory (_nityavibhūti_ and _līlā_ - _vibhūti_) are _śeṣa_ to me and to her, O _Brahma_ and this is declared in the Vedanta and in my _śāstra_s (Pancharātra āgamas)." So also it is said "Being seshi is single and it rests with two (_Bhagavān_ and _Lakṣmī_).” In the Agnisho miya sacrifice, the deity (to whom the _havis_ or offering is made) is not Agni alone not Soma alone; the deity of the sacrifice (which is single) is Agni and Soma. So also in this offering of the self, the deity to whom the offering is intended is both (_Bhagavān_ and _Lakṣmī_). In order to reveal this, it was said “Being _śeṣī_ is single and it rests with two". When we consider the [^86] text[^87]

[^86]: Kaṭha text: By the letter a is denoted _Viṣṇu_, the ruler of all the worlds, and _Lakṣmī_ who is supported by _Viṣṇu_ is denoted by the letter u; the m indicates that the _jīva_ is their servant. This is the definition of _praṇava_.

in the Kaṭha _śruti_, it becomes clear from the words themselves that the self is _śeṣa_ to both. To be _śeṣa_ is to serve the purposes of another without the primary desire to gain something for oneself.

[^87]: vide page _______

The author of _Śrī_ _Bhāṣya_ has explained it as follows:-“ He is the _śeṣa_ whose essential nature (_svarūpa_) has, for its sole interest, the promotion of the glory or excellence of another; the other is the _śeṣī_." The genitive dual case ending which is indicated by the Kaṭha _śruti_ (their servant) is elliptical. The genitive or sixth case, which ordinarily indicates relationship in general, extends here to the special relationship of being _śeṣa_ to _śeṣī_ which is understood from the _pramāṇa_s. Or it may be considered that in order to make clear the relationship of existing only for them', (viz. _Bhagavān_ and _Lakṣmī_), the dative dual termination is present, though in ellipsis. If we take this view, the _śruti_ which says "the servant of both" explains the meaning of the elliptical dative dual.

If we take this interpretation that the u refers to _Lakṣmī_ and that the self is _śeṣa_ to both (_Bhagavān_ and _Lakṣmī_) the ‘only’ formerly stated to be the meaning of u (in a u m) is not given by the word itself but is suggested by the context. It comes to this that this self (the _jīva_) is the unconditioned _śeṣa_ to both _Bhagavān_ and _Lakṣmī_ and to no other.

THE MEANING OF U IN  AUM :

If, on the other hand, we take the middle letter u to mean 'only' in accordance with Vedic usage, the meaning 'only' is to prevent the doubts concerning the relationship of being _śeṣa_ extending to any other (deity) unconditionally and this is done by the word itself (and is not merely suggested by the context). Since it declares that the relationship of being _śeṣa_ to other deities than _Bhagavān_ and _Lakṣmī_ does not pertain to one's essential nature, it follows that contact with other deities should not exist to the man who has a knowledge of the nature of his self, and this avoidance of contact extends even to the devotees of other deities. In the chapter on the Ultimate Object in Life, we have already stated that, since being _śeṣa_ to Bhāgavatas is pleasing to the Lord, it does not constitute the offence of being _śeṣa_ to others.

Thus if by the force of the word itself (namely u), we get the meaning that the relationship of being _śeṣa_ is ruled out in the case of others, it is also evident that the idea of the relationship not existing (towards the Lord) is also ruled out, (since there is no limitation of time (i.e.) the self is always _śeṣa_ to the Lord and is never non-_śeṣa_ to Him). By this ruling out of the non-existence of the relationship of _śeṣa_, the substance (dravya) called the sentient being' is seen to be an attribute incapable of being separated from _Iśvara_ (at any time or place) and is therefore shown to be his body, in the same way as non-septient matter is His body.

THE MEANING OF M IN AUM:

The third letter m (in _aum_) denotes, primarily, the _jīva_ but means also by implication (Upalakṣaṇa) all other things which are _śeṣa_ to the Lord. That this (m) denotes the _jīvātmā_ may be understood from the following: (1) The letter m which denotes the _jīva_ should be used to perform vyāpaka _nyāsa_ (i.e. ) to perform _nyāsa_ in one's body as if it pervades the whole body": (2) The five groups of consonants (in the Sanskrit alphabet) each containing five letters beginning with k (क) and ending with m(म) denote the twentyfive _tattva_s or reals as stated in the Tattvasagarasamhita and the like. The Supreme Ruler is always within these reals as their Inner Self” and (3) “The five\* letters in the Ka (F) group denote the five elements (bhutani), those in the Cha (च) group denote the five senses of action (karmendriyās); those in the ta (ट) group denote the five senses of knowledge (jnanendriyas), those in the ta (त) group denote the five tanmatras (like smell) the pa (प) denotes the mind, the pha (फi) ahaṅkāra, ba (ब) denotes mahat and bha (भ) _prakṛti_. The _jīva_tma is denoted by the letter m and he is the twentyfifth _tattva_ or real."

From these it is evident that the jivātma is different (both) from the twenty-four reals which have the defects of inertness and non-sentience and from the twenty-sixth Real, (namely, _Iśvara_) who is the (ultimate) cause of everything, the Saviour of all and the seshi of all and who is indicated by the first letter (in _aum_),

In the Tiru_mantra_, the words, and Nāra (in Nārāyaṇa), refer only to the attributes, namely, the _jīva_ (and matter) as determinate words ( Niṣkarṣaka words)[^88] and do not refer to the Supreme Self within the _jīva_ (and matter).

[^88]: According to Viśiṣṭādvaita doctrine, many words are indeterminate in meaning; for example go or cow may mean the body of the cow, or the soul of the cow or the Supreme Self within the cow as its Antaryāmi; some words are determinate in meaning, for instance 'cowness' ( gotvam ) which refers only to the jāti (genus) 'cow' of the cow. The m (in _aum_) refers to the _jīva_ and not to the Supreme Self).

If we examine the grammatical form of this letter (m), it is found to have been derived from the root mana meaning 'to know' and other such roots (mas - meaning 'measure ') and it denotes the jīvātmā who is atomic and who is of the essential nature (_svarūpa_) of _jñāna_ and (at the same time) possessed of the attribute, _jñāna_. This is in accordance with the _Brahma_ _Sūtra_ (2-3-19), which says " The jīvātmā is a knower (i.e.) he possesses the attribute 'knowledge' (and is not merely _jñāna_ or knowledge as the Advaitins contend) and this is from the śruti itself".

Though the _jīvātmā_ is said to be, in general terms, of the essential nature of knowledge, yet since this essential nature (_svarūpa_) is known from the _pramāṇa_s (sabda and the like) to be agreeable and pleasing, it is also of the essential nature of _ānanda_ or bliss which is a specific form of knowledge.

When the _jīva_tma is said to be possessed of the attribute, knowledge, since the _pramāṇa_s declare him to be possessed of knowledge without any restrictive word, it should be understood that in the state of _mukti_, his knowledge is all-pervasive and got limited by conditions (or upadhi) and without any restriction or limit.

When we consider this natural and pure form of the jivātma, it will appear that it is free from the inertness and other such defects of nonsentient things and so also from such things as pain, suffering etc., which are found in _samsāra_. Hence in the essential nature and the attributes (_svarūpa_ and _dharma_) of the jivātmā, there is also spotlessness or freedom from all impurity or defect (nirmalatva). The seeker after salvation should meditate that the jīvātmā is absolutely pure and has its enjoyment only in being _śeṣa_ to the Supreme Being and this may be seen from the _Brahma_ _Sūtra_ (3-3-52) which says: "No, only the state (of the jivātmā) that differs from the state of _samsāra_ (should be meditated upon), for that is the state which will ensue (in _mokṣa_) as in the contemplation of _Brahman_ as He is ".

To the _prapanna_, the meditation on the fruit of attainment in _mukti_ is useful in creating a desire for that fruit. The forms of meditation (concerning the form of the self) are different in accordance with the difference in the fruits desired and this is evident from the eighth chapter of the Gita and _Śrī_ _Bhāṣya_ and other such treatises.

Since the _pramāṇa_s declare a plurality (or very large number) of souls, this third letter m (in _aum_), used in the singular, denotes the _jāti_ or genus (and not a single individual), as in the _Brahma_ _Sūtra_ (2-3.18) which says. The soul (or self) is not (generated) for (so says) the _Śruti_.' (Here the word ' soul' denotes the genus and therefore it really means ' souls' (or self's).

Though it is stated here that all souls are _śeṣa_s to _Bhagavān_ in general terms as in: --"All souls are the servants of the Supreme Self by their very nature" -- yet since the individual is also included in the all souls,' it follows that for that reason, every one should realise that he is also the servant of the Lord.

Here the knowledge of being a _śeṣa_, the abandonment of the conceit of one's independence (of the Lord), the adoption of the particular _upāya_ (namely, _prapatti_) and the prayer for the fruit to be attained, namely, the service of a _śeṣa_ to the Lord have all to arise in the individual; therefore the individual is the principal (figure). So some _ācārya_s say that the word _aham_ (I) should be taken as understood and as being the substantive to which the m (which means the _jīva_) is the adjective "I who am a _jīva_". In that case, as stated also in _śloka_s which elaborate the _praṇava_, "Whatever is mine and I myself are Thine, O Lord, Madhava! I am well aware of this "; since attributes always follow the principal (or the substantive), the qualities and attributes are also intended by implication (Upalakṣaṇa), (2) Other _ācārya_s hold that the third letter itself (m) shows the _aham_ (or I) by dropping, in the word (asmat=I) of the first part as and the latter part at and retaining only the consonant m in the middle, in accordance with Vedic usage. In _Nyāsa_ _vidyā_ (as described in the Taittiriya upanishad) which enjoins the offering of the self as an oblation to the Supreme Being, the _praṇava_ is called the _mantra_ (for it). In order that the action to be performed may be made clear, the actual words indicating the Supreme Self and the individual self should be expressed and not remain merely implicit. Since according to the _pramāṇa_s, the first letter (a) denotes the person to whom the surrender is made and the middle letter (u) has some other meaning (either only or _Lakṣmī_), by the law of what remains (pāriseshya) the third letter (m) should indicate the oblation, namely, the individual self that is to be offered. Therefore it is appropriate to hold that this (third) letter should mean _aham_ (or I). Therefore it is that Bhattar commented on the _praṇava_ in Tiru_mantra_ as follows:- "I exist only as the property for _Bhagavān_ who is indicated by the letter a".

THE MEANING OF NAMAS OR NAMO IN TIRU_MANTRA_:

So also the ma in _namas_ (_namo_) denotes the individual self in any one of the three ways indicated before (1) 25th _tattva_ (2) the knowing self and (3) short for _aham_. This ma is in the genitive or sixth case ending, and the na (which precedes it) means negation 'no' or 'not'. So it is equivalent to na mama (not mine). The negation na (not) is placed first to indicate its greater importance as in the sentence drishtā Sītā (seen was Sītā). The genitive case in ma is a mark of relationship in general (sambandha sāmanya) and implies (here) the particular form of relationship (that of a _śeṣa_ to the _śeṣī_). It is with this idea indeed that Bhattar said, " I do not then exist for myself.” The idea contained in this _namas_ which has the same purport as the ‘only’ of the middle letter u in _praṇava_--for all sentences should be considered as expressive of exclusive affirmation (avadharana) - this idea is of the greatest importance, and it is said in such _śloka_s as the following:- " The cause of _samsāra_ (bondage) is the two letters mama (mine) and the cause of attaining the eternal _Brahman_ is the sentence having three letters na mama (I am) not mine)." The idea of the following _śloka_ has also the same porport as this _namas_:-"All that is crooked is the cause of _samsāra_; all that is straight is the cause that effects the attainment of _Brahman_". (Here the idea that we exist for _Bhagavān_i is straight and the idea that we exist for ourselves is crooked.)

If it is asked “What is it that is not mine (na mama)?", the answer is found supplied by the context (anush_aṅga_) viz., the third letter in _praṇava_ and is as follows :

"I do not belong to myself". In the chapter on [^89] anush_aṅga_(The Context) it is evident that the meaning indicated by the context (anush_aṅga_) is more appropriate than the meaning arrived at by the insertion of a new word (adhyāhara).- Here na mama _aham_ "I am not mine" specifies that I am not mine. As the middle letter (in _praṇava_ ) namely only, has already stated that I exist only for _Iśvara_, which negates _śeṣa_tva to others, this specification in _namas_ indicates that in others oneself is also included. By the principle illustrated in  go-balīvarda[^90]

[^89]: Namas. Advaitins might say that the ma is in the ablative or fifth case meaning "than I" (There is nothing other than I) and if we consider that the word kinchit is understood and insert it, ‘na ma' may mean "There is nothing else other than l". Here the word kinchit has to be understood (adhyāhara) which is not so appropriate, as anuṣ_aṅga_

(The specification is to show the negation of oneself in special as not having been included in the ‘others' stated in the middle letter).

[^90]: Though the Sanskrit word Go[गो] would include "bull" yet the phrase go and bull is often used to emphasise bull and draw special attention to it.

Aham na mama ("I am not mine") is the sentence in _namas_. From this it becoms clear that even one's _svarūpa_ (essential nature) does not belong to oneself. Since attributes and qualities always follow the principal or substantive, it is tantamount to saying, specially, that one is not the unconditioned master of anything (belonging to one). This is the purpose of the specification,

If we do not take the word _aham_ from the context (anush_aṅga_) and accept the interpretation given above, it would mean that the general misapprehension that certain things (for example, our body and our qualities) really belong to us will be taken away from one's self.

Thus _namas_ dispels one's conceit (abhimāna) about oneself and about those which appear to be one's by stating that they do not belong to one and the root causes of _samsāra_, namely the notions of 'I' and 'mine' which are false, are thereby removed. The conceit (ahamkāra) which is thus removed is a form of illusory knowledge. The word ahamkāra is used also to mean one of the twenty-four reals (tattvas), but that ahamkāra is not capable of being removed by mere intelligence. It persists with the _jīva_ until its separation from the subtle body (sīkshma _śarīra_). Though this connection with the non-sentient _tattva_ (real) called ahankāra continues to exist, its effects in the form of the disease of conceit (abhimana) and the like which are illusory are cured by medicine in the forın of discrimination (viveka) resulting from such things as the mūlamantra.

Since, from the middle letter of _praṇava_, the notion that one is _śeṣa_ to any other than the Lord is got rid of, there is no need to state separately that one is not _śeṣa_ to oneself. Therefore the purport may also be to show that the person to whom certain things appear to be _śeṣa_ and who appears to be _śeṣī_ is not the unconditioned master or _śeṣī_ of any of these things. All those things that are _śeṣa_ to the _jīva_ (like his body, his attributes, his wealth etc.) are indeed those that were given to him for His own purposes by the Supreme: Ruler, who is the _śeṣī_ of all.

Those qualities and the like of the _jīva_s which are eternal have become theirs by the eternal will of _Iśvara_. The transitory bodies and the like which are theirs in the impure state (_samsāra_) and in the pure state (after _mukti_ when they might take bodies for some purpose or other)--these result from the transitory will of _Iśvara_ as the effect of past _karma_  (in the case of the former) and without any relation to _karma_ (in the case of the latter).

The _praṇava_ states that the _jīva_ is _śeṣa_ to none other (than _Bhagavān_). So it becomes evident that he is not _śeṣa_ even to himself as he is other than _Bhagavān_; it follows from this that, in the same way as he is _śeṣa_ to nobody else (than _Bhagavān_), no other thing is unconditionally _śeṣa_ to him. This does not appear in the _praṇava_. Therefore this may be the purport of the _namas_ that the _jīva_ is in no way independent (i.e.) that he has no svatantryam). In that case, taking from the context (anush_aṅga_) the m in _praṇava_, it would give the meaning "I am not capable of maintaining or looking after myself."

It is also possible to understaod (adhyāhara), the word svatantrya (independence) after na mama. It would then read na mama svātantryam (I have no independence). The absence of independence in the case of the sentient being is the inability to act independently (of the Lord) (i.e.) without His help. This is because, though in the state of bondage and in the state of release, he acts in accordance with his own mind, he can act only with such things as the senses given by _Iśvara_ and by His stimulation and with His help.

The protectorship of all, indicated by the base (_prakṛti_) (viz) a in the first letter of _praṇava_, ensues, in the case of those who adopt an _upāya_, only by stimulating them to the adoption of any one of the _upāya_s. Though the _jīva_ adopts the _upāya_, since his activity is dependent on the Lord and since the one who affords protection by granting the fruit (of the _upāya_) is the Supreme Ruler who is gracious, it is only His protectorship of all indicated in the base of the first letter (of _praṇava_) that is confirmed by this _namas_. Similarly _Iśvara_'s being the unconditional _śeṣī_ of all which is stated by the dative case (fourth case) of the first letter a in the _praṇava_ (where the case ending has been dropped) -- this is confirmed by the interpretation suggested before, which denies unconditioned seshitvam to the _jīva_. As declared in the _Brahma_ _Sūtra_ (2-3-40), “The doership of the _jīva_ is due to the Supreme Being as stated in the _Śruti_ ", the independence that the _jīva_ seems to possess is granted to him in the execution of His own purposes by the Supreme Being who is the unconditioned _śeṣī_ of all. The _jīva_'s being seshi to other things is also due to its being given to him by the unconditioned seshi for the fulfilment of His own purposes. To sum up

SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_S:~

॥ श्रीमान् स्वतन्त्रस्स्वामी च सर्वत्रान्यानपेक्षया ।  
निरपेक्षस्वतन्त्रत्वं स्वाम्यञ्चाा न्यस्य न क्वचित् ॥  
तारस्य नमसश्चेमौ सारौ देशिकदर्शितौ ।  
अनन्यशरणत्वादेरधिकारस्य सिद्धये ॥

The Lord of _Śrī_ is (alone) independent in all things and is (alune) the Master (of all) without being dependent on any one else. Independence without any dependence for help on others and mastership belong to no one else.

This gist of the _praṇava_ and of the _namas_ has been taught to us by (our) üchāryas, in order that we may have the competence (for _prapatti_), namely, such as having the Lord alone as our refuge.

In ordinary life, being master over others and being inde pendent of others are considered desirable, and being a servant and being dependent on others are considered undesirable. This is merely due to past _karma_  as a conditioning factor (upādhi). But here (in spiritual life), being a servant (of the Lord) and being dependent (on the Lord) are agreeable to those who have a know ledge of the truth, for they are appropriate and natural to our _svarūpa_ (essential nature), as stated in such passages as the following: "We are all, by  nature, His servants". Thus it becomes evident that the _jīva_ exists solely for another (_Iśvara_) and is entirely dependent on Him. So the _jīva_ may rightly be employed to do what is pleasing to the _śeṣī_, who alone is independent (and omnipotent). Therefore it follows that the _jīva_ should be _śeṣa_ (and render service) to His devotees, as stated.( in the Tamil verse) ;-" The Lord who is absolutely pure, has made me the servant of His servants". If the Lord who is the _śeṣī_, and who is independent (and all powerful) is pleased to make us _śeṣa_s to His good devotees, it cannot be called improper or inappropriate; nor can it be avoided (or resisted). Since He is _śeṣī_, He has a right to employ us in whatever He desires, and since He is all powerful, He can enforce it. This idea may also be seen in the (Tamil) verse :- "I will never" associate with those who think that there is any deity other than Thee. But gladly do I accept (the privilege of) being servant to Thy devotees."

SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_S :

॥ स्वेच्छयैव परेशस्य तादधीन्यबलात्तु नः । भगवद्भक्तशेषत्वं स्वेच्छयापि क्वचिद्भवेत् ॥  
गुणाधिकेहि विषये गुणसारस्य वेदिनः । रामे रामानुजस्येव दास्यं गुणकृतं भवेत् ॥  
दास्यमैश्वर्ययोगेन ज्ञातीनाञ्च करोम्यहं ॥ अर्धभोक्ता च भोगानां वाग्दुरुक्तानि च क्षमे ॥  
इति स्वोक्तिनयादेव स्वभक्तविषये विभुः । आत्मात्मीयस्य सर्वस्य सङ्कल्पयति शेषताम् ॥  
अन्योन्यशेषभावेऽपि परस्वातंत्र्यसंभवः । तत्तदाकारभेदेन युक्त इत्युपपादितम् ॥

Being _śeṣa_ to His devotees results to the Supreme Ruler from His own desire; but to us, it is a consequence of our being dependent on Him. (Sometimes) even to us, it may come as a consequence of our own desire, for to one who appreciates the worth of (virtuous) qualities, a desire to serve may arise towards those who are great by their virtues. Thus service may be done owing to an appreciation of (noble) qualities, like the service of Lakṣmaṇa to _Śrī_ Rāma. The omnipotent Lord has Himself said. "I [_Śrī_ Kṛṣṇa's words] render service to those who are my kinsmen by virtue of my being independent. I give one half (of what I have) to my kinsfolk and enjoy the other half. I forgive also harsh words (employed) by them towards me ". Thus by virtue of these words of His, He has willed that we should be _śeṣa_s to Himself and to His devotees. It has already been shown (in the chapter on the extreme limit of the ultimate goal of life) that the service rendered as _śeṣa_s by the devotees to one another is due to the will of the omni-potent Lord and is appropriate in different ways (in exalting others and in being exalted by them).

Since the _jīva_ who is thus (_akiñcana_) destitute (of any _upāya_s) has to receive the desired object from the independent _śeṣī_ in accordance with His will, the prayer for protection (saranavaranam) which is explicitly stated in _Dvaya_ and the _Carama_ _śloka_ for winning His favour is necessary and it is here implicit, in _namas_ of the Tiru_mantra_. Since the surrender of the self and the prayer for protection are inseparable, the word which denotes either denotes also the other and is intended to express both. The word _namas_ is itself (often) employed to stand for the prayer for protection, as may be seen from the following _śloka_s: "The deity with eyes broad like lotuses that was seen by me before - He has now become (incarnate as) your relative viz. _Janārdana_, the tiger among men". "Madhava" is both the father and the mother of the whole world. Seek His protection, O best among men, for He is capable of protecting (you)." " When Markandeya gave them this advice, the three sons of Kunti and the twins, O best of the Bharatas, made namaskāra to _Janārdana_ along with Droupadi ", so also in the episode of Damayanti (we find the following); "She considered that the time had come to seek refuge of the gods. So she made namaskara with (all) her speech and (all) her mind." (Since _namas_ has been used to signify the prayer for protection ), it indicates that the responsibility for protecting oneself is not of the _jīva_ (na mama bharah), where the word bharah (the burden of responsibility) is understood. Thus its purport may also be the surrender of responsibility. That the word _namas_ indicates the surrender of self (atna samarpanam) is also wellknown from the following _śloka_s : "Of all yajnas which's are performed with samit and such like as an aid, the man who has surrendered his self (ātma samarpana) to _Bhagavān_ with the word _namas_ is said to have performed the best Yajna," and "I bow to _Bhagavān_, for _namas_ (bowing) or atma samarpaņam to Him enables a man to get rid of his suffering and enjoy whatever he wants ".

That the word _namas_ has these meanings, viz., “I do not belong to myself; nor is any activity of mine _śeṣa_ to me; all these are _śeṣa_ only to _Bhagavān_," is stated in the section on the namaskāra in Nirukti.

THE THREE MEANINGS OF NAMAS:

Sthula, Sukshma and _Para_ :

Ahirbhudnya (Siva) commented on the word _namas_ as having three different meanings : a gross meaning (sthūlārtha) a subtle meaning (suīkshmārtha), and a supreme meaning (para), in the following _śloka_s :

I. STHULĀRTHA :

(8) The act of an intelligent man bowing his body, of his own accord, before another who is higher (without expecting any gain fron it) is called _namas_. In the _śāstra_s, all sentient beings are spoken of as belonging to two classes, the higher (Jyāyān), and the lower (ajyāyān). There is no one other than these. The primary meaning of the higher being' is He who has superior excellence both in time and (place) and in attributes. _Bhagavān_ is present at all times and in all places and possesses also qualities that are beyond (all) measure. So He alone is the higher (Jyāyan). All sentient beings other than He are lower (ajyāyān). The relation between these two, the higher and the lower, is that He is the _śeṣī_ and the others (who are lower) are _śeṣa_s (to Him). The higher is only One; all the rest are lower and the relation between these two consists in this, that He is bowed to and that the others bow to Him. He who is bowed to is called the higher and the _śeṣī_; the others who are _śeṣa_s are said to be those who bow ( to him). The relation between them and Him is not on account of any gain (expected by them); this relation between the higher and the lower is due to their nature, when the sentient being bows to the Higher Person without expecting any gain and with a certain feeling; that feeling is called nanana ( bowing) (b) Namanam (bowing ) consists in the thought: "_Bhagavān_ is always my seshī and I am always his _śeṣa_," for it is this thought that is the cause of the bowing (of the body). This bowing makes _Bhagavān_ bend in favour to the man who bows (i.c.) it makes _Bhagavān_ grant to the man who bows whatever is desired by him. This is certain. _Bhagavān_, who is higher, observes the bowing of the man who is lower and bends (is inclined) (to do him grace). Since it makes _Bhagavān_ bend in favour, this action is called _namas_: (c) Uttering the word _namas_ with speech, having this _namas_ in mind and bowing with the body--this is _namas_ in its perfection (_śaraṇāgati_) and what is different from it in being defective in one or other of the three aspects is called defective _namas_. This is perfect _prapatti_ (as _aṅgī_).

"I will tell you its accessories or _aṅga_s in their perfection : Listen. "The _prapatti_ that I perform to _Bhagavān_, the Supreme Being, is itself my eternal fruit. I desire no other fruit." To have this (thought) is the best of accessories (_aṅga_s). The desire for (other) fruit or gain is opposed to this _aṅga_. _Ākiñcanya_ or being destitute is the condition of being without the knowledge or the ability to perform _bhakti_ . This state of destitution is due to false notions (vāsanas) that have been persisting in the mind from beginningless time and to the man's being by nature without independence. It is due also to the mind being covered by the impurities of desire and hatred (rāga and dvesha). The external manifestation of this teeling of helplessness is called kārparyam and it is the second _aṅga_. The thought that one is independent and could act of one's own accord is opposed to this. The third _aṅga_ is the thought that, though _Bhagavān_ is the Supreme Being, He is merciful to all creatures and is ever bent on showing His grace to them. This is called mahavis'vāsa or intense faith and the thought that _Bhagavān_ will reward or pupish according to one's _karma_  and will (therefore) be indifferent towards one-this thought is opposed to intense faith. The fourth _aṅga_ is the thought that _Bhagavān_ is all-powerful and can protect us and the prayer (resulting from it) for protection. This would arise if we give up the thought that _Bhagavān_, though merciful, is wanting in the ability to protect us. The obstacle to this _aṅga_ is the thought that He would be indifferent to us as He is without the quality of goodness. The fifth _aṅga_ is called the avoidance of what is disagreeable (to _Bhagavān_). It consists in avoiding actions which would be against the will of the Master, The obstacle to this is doiog what is for bidden in the śāstras. The sixth _aṅga_ is the determination to do good to all creatures in as much as all creatures-both those that move and those that do not move--are His body. Doing what is harmful to them is opposed to this. Thus have I explained to you namana (or s'aranāgati) which consists of the _aṅga_s and the upāngas[^91] which mean avoiding what is opposed to them. This is the gross (_sthūla_) meaniog of the word _namas_.

[^91]: _Aṅga_s are accessorics, up_aṅga_s are those that are accessories to _aṅga_s: here the avoidance of what is opposed to the respective _aṅga_s.

II. THE SUBTLE MEANING - SUKSHMĀRTHA:

Learn (now) the subtle meaning - (sukshmārtha). Whenever the sentient being considers himself and what is connected with him as his own, the two letters ma, and ma in mama (mine) signify the notion of mine' or _mamakāra_. The thought regarding oneself and those things that are connected with one that one is independent and that these things belong to oneself - this thought has arisen from the false notion which has grown in strength owing to wrong impressions (vāsanas) which are from time immemorial (beginningless ). This notion can be countered by the right thought viz., me na (These are not mine). The meaning of me na is, “I am not independent. I am not _śeṣa_ to myself (but to God). (My) body and other things are not mine; they are _śeṣa_s to the Supreme Being." By this right understanding, those false thoughts that they belong to oneself disappear, Owing to those false thoughts that have arisen from false impressions (vāsanas ), which are from time immemorial (anadi) and which have grown in strength by notions opposed to the true nature of things, (we think as follows ):- "I am independent: these things are mine." This thought is got rid of by the word _namas_ uttered by the man performing _prapatti_ with the right understanding that _Bhagavān_ (_Viṣṇu_) is the inner self or soul of all. Thus has the subtle meaning been explained,

III. THE SUPREME MEANING: (parārtha):

"Listen now to the supreme meaning (para), which is different (from what has been said before). The syllable na indicates the _upāya_ (or endeavour): ma indicates that it is principal or all - important and the visarga (final aspirate) vis., S (in _namas_) means _Bhagavān_. This is the meaning obtained from that word (_namas_):-"In order to attain _Bhagavān_, who is eternal and who is the highest ruler, who is omnipotent and is called _Puruṣottama_ - (in order to attain Him), _Bhagavān_ is Himself the principal means called namana, Thus have I explained to you the three meanings of _namas_."

' Since, in the above, it is stated that only the Sapreme _śeṣī_ should be bowed to or sought as refuge, it is evident and appropriate that the Being to whom _namas_ is due is the Supreme _śeṣī_. In order to make it clear who this Supreme Seshī is, the specific name (_Bhagavān_) is given. In one of the _śloka_s quoted before,it is said, "Doing what is forbidden by the _śāstra_s is opposed to this (avoiding what is disagreeable to Him)", and so also "Doing evil to other creatures is opposed to this doing what is pleasing to Him). The gist of these sentences is that, if at the time of performing _prapatti_, there occurs an act which is deliberate and is disagreeable (to the Lord), there are absent the determination to do what is pleasing (to Him) and also such things as the abstinence in thought from doing what is disagreeable (to Him). If, after the performance of _prapatti_, the man deliberately does what is disagreeable (to Him), he acts in a manner which is opposed to the command of _Bhagavān_, whom he sought with eagerness (while performing _prapatti_).

In the _śloka_s cited above, the gross meaning (sthūlārtha) is that which appears obvious from etymological derivation according to grammar. The subtle meaning (sūkshmārtha) is that which appears from interpretation based on the similarity of syllables on the strength of Nirukta. The supreme meaning (parārtha) is that which is explained in the secret _śāstra_s (i.e.) _śāstra_s which comment on the meaning of the secret _mantra_s with the help of the conventions regarding the meaning of letters. (In the _śloka_s cited above), in the first (sthulartha) interpretation, the behaviour which is inherent by nature to the _śeṣa_ (namely, namana) and the structure or constitution of _Sādhyopāya_ with its _aṅga_s, are explained. Then, in the second, they clarify the _svarūpa_ of the _jīva_, as this is essential to the aspirant to _mukti_ who adopts the _upāya_, namely, that he has no unconditional independence. Then in the third (i.e.) para, the _śloka_s indicate the nature of _Siddhopāya_ (_Bhagavān_), who can be won by the adoption of the particular _Sādhyopāya_ and who is also the object to be attained. It may also be understood as stating that surrender (of self) is more important' than all other _upāya_s. All these are to be understood in their proper places where the ten different interpretations are given later on.

SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_S:--

एवं शिक्षितनानार्थनमश्शब्दसमन्विताः । सर्वे करणतां यान्ति मन्त्रास्स्वात्मसमर्पणे ॥  
जीवसामान्यमुखतश्शृङ्गग्राहिकयापि वा । मकारौ तारनमसोस्स्वानुसन्धानदाविह ॥  
इह या स्वानुसन्धानप्रक्रियैकस्य दर्शिता । अन्येषामपि तत्साम्यान्नान्योन्यशरणा इमे ॥  
अतस्स्वपर-रक्षायां पराधीनेषु जन्तुषु । निरपेक्षशरण्यत्वं नियतं कमलापतौ ॥

All the _mantra_s that are combined with the word _namas_ with its various meanings as stated above become operative _mantra_s to be einployed while surrendering one's self. The ma in _praṇava_ and in the _namas_ lead to the consideration of one's self either by reference to the _Jīva_ as a genus (_Jāti_) including one, or by reference to 'I' directly which is like catching hold of the horns (i.e.) (by pointing to what is essential and all-important). Since the consideration that has been pointed out in regard to one, applies equally to others as well, there is no question of any one being the Saviour of any other. Therefore since all creatures are dependent (on another) in the matter of protecting themselves and protecting others, protectorship not dependent on others is vested only in the Lord of Kamala (_Lakṣmī_)

THE WORD NĀRĀYAṆA IN TIRU_MANTRA_:

The word Nārāyaṇa here (in Tiru_mantra_) explains (in full), by its conventional usage and by its etymology, the unconditional Saviour who appears in the first letter (of the _praṇava_) as the Protector of all and as the _śeṣī_ of all. His grace is to be obtained by means of the _sādhyopāya_ called _śaraṇāgati_ (seeking protection or refuge of the Lord), whicb is seen either implicitly or explicitly in the word _namas_. He is to be the recipient of the service rendered by the _prapanna_, which is implicit in the dative (fourth) case ( of the word Nārāyaṇa) (i.e.) Narāyaṇāya.

Explanation or elaboration is the clarification of what has been briefly stated before in another manner, so that there may be no ignorance, doubt or misconception (about its meaning). This explanation may be seen wherever it occurs [(i.e.) the meaning hinted at in the first letter a (of _praṇava_) is explained in the word Nārāyaṇa and the meaning of m in _praṇava_ is explained in the word Nara and so on] .

This word, Nārāyaṇa, which is of great help in showing clearly the two _tattva_s, namely, the _śeṣa_ and the _śeṣī_ finds the first place, in the _Viṣṇu_gāyatri and in the Tirunarayaniyam, where certain names are commented upon before other vyāpaka names of _Bhagavān_.

[ 053:-_Viṣṇu_gayatri: Nārāyaṇaya vidmahe; Vasudevaya dhimahi, Tanno _Viṣṇu_h prachodayat,]

(Nārāyaṇa, _Vāsudeva_ and _Viṣṇu_ are called _vyāpaka_ names because their etymology indicates that the one referred to by them is present everywhere).

In the Nārāyaṇānuvāka which aims at determining the person of the Supreme Deity, who is the object of meditation in all vidyās, the word Nārāyaṇa is repeated many times, thus showing great regard, for the purpose of declaring that _Brahma_, Siva and others, who might, on first thought, be considered as the Supreme Deity, on the strength of the presence of their names in. the _vidyā_s are only the vibhūtis (or glorious possessions) of Nārāyaṇa just like the universe (which attests His glory). This it does by stating them in *grammatical co-ordination or apposition with Nārāyaṇa (sāmānādhikaraṇyam)[^92] .

[^92]: Grammatical co-ordination: The following sentences in the Nārāyaṇānuvaka are referred to here: “ This universe is all the deity Nārāyaṇa: He is the inner self of the universe: Nārāyaṇa is the Supreme Jyotis (Light): The Supreme Being is Nārāyaṇa: Nārāyaṇa is the Supreme _Brahman_: Nārāyaṇa is the Supreme Tattva (Reality)....... He is _Brahma_: He is Siva: He is Indra : He is Akshara and He is the Supreme Independent Sovereign Ruler".

It declares that even these, (_Brahma_, Siva and others) are included in the meaning of Nāra (the first part of the compound) and that Nārāyaṇa is their resting place or refuge.

The potency of this name is well-known from the following passages: "Those who are afraid of _samsāra_ and who suffer from terrible diseases are relieved of their sufferings by merely uttering the word Nārāyaṇa, and attain happiness”. “The man in whose mouth is the auspicious word, Nārāyaṇa, is followed by Nārāyaṇa even as the calf is followed by the cow." " The word Nārāyaṇa is always available. Oar speech is within our control. Notwithstanding this, the _jīva_s fall into the darkest hell by not uttering the word": " The name, Nārāyaṇa, confers (on the man who utters it) good birth in a Vaishnavite family: it confers also wealth.” “The mother  who gives the name, Nārāyaṇa, to her son will never go to hell." In the Nāradīya kalpa it is said: " Even those who utter the mere word, Nārāyaṇa, are relieved of their diseases, of their dangers, of their fears and of their sorrows. There is no doubt of this." In another purāņa it is stated that if the number of vowels and consonants (in the word, Nārāyaṇa ) be taken separately into account, it will (be seen to) resemble Tiru_mantra_ in having eight letters and may be treated as such.

The compound word Nārāyaṇa may be split up into its two component parts thus: Nārāh ayanam yasya (He to whom Nārās are the resting place ) and Nārāņām ayanam (the resting place of Nārās). The word Nārās is here determinate in meaning and denotes only the nārās (sentient beings and non-sentient things) and does not refer also to the Lord who is their inter self. Therefore the two words are not in grammatical apposition. Nammalvar distinctly showed the meanings of these two ways of combining the two parts of the word (samāsa) in the following two passages by using the word at the end and at the beginning respectively. "He who has, as His _śeṣa_s," countless _jīva_s with knowledge and bliss as their attributes and with self-luminousness as their nature and also His own noble qualities--that Nārāyaṇa," and " Nārāyaṇa" is the Lord of all the seven worlds". In this are implicit (_Bhagavān_'s) possessing the two kinds of attributes, namely, freedom from defects and possession of all auspicious and noble qualities and, likewise, His possession of the two vibhūtis (glories), namely _Līlā_ _Vibhūti_ (this (material) Universe) with all the sentient and nonsentient beings in it) and _Nitya_ _Vibhūti_, (the transcendental region of eternal glory with all that it contains). It should be borne in mind that this nārās includes the queen, the ornaments, the weapons, the attendants, the furniture and the like, the door-keepers, the retinue and such others.

SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_:

॥ कारणत्वमबाध्यत्वमुपायत्वमुपेयता । इति शारीरकस्थाप्यमिह चापि व्यवस्थितम् ॥

In the word Nārāyaṇa, are contained all the attributes (of _Brahman_) which are established in the four chapters) of the Sarīraka _Śāstra_:(_Brahma_ sūtras), namely, His being the cause of the Universe, the irrefutability of the proposition that He is the cause, His being the _upāya_ for the attainment of _mukti_ and His being the object of attainment (in _mukti_). All this has been explained by Bhattar in His _Nitya_ in the words beginning with "Knowledge, bliss, purity and the like.”

THE MEANING OF NĀRĀS:

"I created the waters, which are called nārās, and lay within them. Therefore am I called Nārāyaṇa." "The waters are called Nārās because they were born of Nara (i. e. _Bhagavān_). They were at first His abode. Therefore is He called Nārāyaṇa." In these two _śloka_s, the waters refer by implication (Upalakṣaṇa) to the other sattvas (reals) as well. This is evident from such passages as the following :- "The sattvas or reals had all their origin from Nara. Therefore are they known as Nāras. To Him they are the abode, therefore is He considered to be Nārāyaṇa." In this interpretation of the word as a grammatical compound Bahuvrihi samāsa ( Nārah ayanan yasya), it is stated that the _tattva_s had their origin from Nara and are therefore called nāras. From this it follows that, as stated in Mahopanishad and elsewhere, Nārāyaṇa is the cause of all (things and beings ) including _Brahma_ and Isana ( Siva) in every way (i. e. the material cause and the instrumental cause). The word ayana (resting place ) is derived in this way:-‘I yate iti' ayanam. That which is pervaded is ayana (the passive voice being used for deriving the word). This declares that He pervades all, as they are all pervaded by him and that in order that He may do so, He has unparallelled subtleness (sukshmatva). Ayana may be derived also in another way: Iyate asmin iti : (That in which it is), in which case it would mean that in which everything rests. The word Nārāyaṇa may be considered also as a compound of the tatpurusha type (tatpurusha samāsa), in which case it would be split into Narāņam and. ayanaın (the abode of Nārās ). It is true that the compound word should then be in the neuter gender Nārāyaṇam, but by the authority of nirukti, the masculine form Nārāyaṇah is not improper. The _pramāṇa_s are the following :-"He is also called Nārāyaṇa, for He is the resting place or abode of Narās". "The multitude of all _jīva_s is called Nārās. Since _Bhagavān_ is to be attained by them and is also the _upāya_ for attaining Him, He is called Nara yana". "Nāra is so called because it means the multitude of _jīva_s which are indicated by the word nara. I am the goal to be attained by them; I am also the _upāya_ for that attainment. Therefore am I called Nārāyaṇa by the seers." "The wise call the multitude of _jīva_s by the name Nāra. He is called Nārāyaṇa because He is their ayana (abode or resting place). Therefore those who are thoroughly conversant with the Vedas and the Vedanta declare Him to be the kinsman, the mother, the father, the _guru_ and the abode or resting place."

THE DERIVATION OF THE WORD NARA:

The verbal root ‘in’ means 'to perish'; so ra (in nara) denotes non-sentient things (i.e.) matter which perishes (i. e.) changes its essential nature (_svarūpa_). Nara therefore, denotes those that do not perish or change their essential nature (i.e.) chetanas (sentient beings, using the na samāsa on the analogy of words like Naga - which means .mountain', for it does not (na) go

or move (ga) and naika, na-eka " not one" (1. c.) many'. So Nara means sentient beings only; nāra means the multitude of naras. Their ayanam (abode or resting place) is Nārāyaṇa. This declares that He who has under His control the three kinds of chetanas or sentient beings (the bound, the released and the eternal) and also nonsentient things, their essential nature (or existence) their sustenance, and their activity--He is, to the three kinds of multitudinous souls (the bound, the released and the eternal) who are denoted by the word nara, the Dispenser of what they desire. It says also that since He is blissful, He is, of his own accord, the _upeya_ (i. e.) the object of attainment and is also the support or resting place (_ādhāra_), for it is said, “ Thus has it been explained how the three worlds have _Viṣṇu_ as the _ādhāra_ (resting place or abode)” and “He has entered into the three lokas, viz. the non-sentient, the sentient and the released souls and supports thern without undergoing any change."

How these meanings are traceable in the word ayana will now be explained :- The word ayana may be derived from the verbal root in (which means to go), in three ways: (1) īyate anena iti ayana). Ayana is that by which or with which one goes, where it refers to the instrument (karana) or aid. ( When derived in this way) _Iśvara_ becomes the _upāya_ or means (2) iyate asau iti ayana) "That which is reached. In this derivation _Iśvara_ becomes the _upeya_ or object that is reached or attained: (3) īyato asmin iti ayana): "that in which it rests." In this derivation _Iśvara_ becomes the support or ādhāra on which everything reste. Ayana may also be derived from the verbal root ay, which means "to go."

It is evident that _Iśvara_ has in Him the qualities necessary for being the _upāya_, the _upeya_ and the like, viz., easy accessibility (saulabhyam) and being supreme (paratvam). When ayana means 'abode', if we take Nārāyaṇa to be a bahuvrihi compound ( Nārāh Ayanam Yasya) (He whose abode is Nārās ), it is considered to indicate that Nārāyaṇa pervades all things and beings within them (i, e.) that He is immanent within them. If we take Nārāyaṇa to be a tatpurusha compound (Nārāņam ayanam: the abode of Nārās, the (compound) word indicates that He pervades them froin without (they being within Him) (i.e.) that He is transcendent. These two are declared in the śrutis (i.e.) in Nārāyaṇānuvakam) Immanence (or antarvyāpti) means being present inseparably connected with other things and beings in such a way that it cannot be said that He is not present where they are: Transcendence (bahirvyapti) means being present also in places where they are not present. Such things as Time ( Kāla) are omnipresent (vibhu). So it should not be stated that _Iśvara_ is outside of them. When it is said "Nārāyaṇa who is smaller (aiyiin) than all the smallest: the meaning of the word (aṇu is not 'of small size' but subtle'. So the passage really means: “Nārāyaṇa who is subtler than all the subtle things ". It means that owing to His being subtle nothing can prevent Him from being within them,

In the _śruti_ ( which says “ He is smaller than the grain called s'yāmāka), the purport is that He is of the size of the object within Which He is present (i.e.) of the measure of the upādhi or conditioning factor, and this is distinctly stated in the _Brahma_ sūtras and their commentary (_Śrī_ _Bhāṣya_m). Being full and complete in every object, on the part of One who is both immanent and transcendent, means that that aspect or phase of His which is within any one upadhi or conditioning factor is capable of (creating, sustaining and destroying) and doing such other things to all things and beings. It does not mean that His essential nature is all contained (and exhausted) within any one object (to the exclusion of all others). If we understand it in that sense, it would be opposed to His transcendence. If we explain this by saying that _Iśvara_ has the power of bringing together those which cannot be brought together (aghatitaghatanā _śakti_), it would be acceptance of the position of other systems (like Bhaskara's and Yadava prakasa's), which maintain the possibility of bringing together things which are opposed to each other (Bhaskara and Yađava prakasa say that difference and non-difference can coexist). Here in Tiru_mantra_, when the Supreme Ruler of all is indicated by the first letter (of _praṇava_), the base nara of the word Nāras and the word ayana, all these words are purposely used to indicate His being the Protector and His being the ultimate  cause (in a), His being eternal and His being the netă (guide) (in the word nara) and His being the resting place or support and the inner self in the word (ayana) in different ways. (It should not be thought that these three mean the same thing and that two of them are therefore redundant).

If it be asked: "While the _Cetana_ or sentient being is already indicated by the third letter of _praṇava_ (m), why should it be mentioned again in the word Nara (in Nārāyaṇa)". The answer is as follows: "I do not exist without Thee, (my support); Thou dost not exist without me, (for I bring out Thy character:) " "Rāma's younger brother (Lakṣmaṇa), and Lakṣmaṇa's elder brother". (In the two passages mentioned above, there is apparent repetition, but it is not a fault since it serves a definite purpose). (In the first passage ), the first part of the sentence emphasises the importance of the _śeṣī_ and the second emphasises the importance of the _śeṣa_; so also (in the secodd. passage ) Rāma's importance is hinted at in _Rāmānuja_ (Rāma's younger brother) and Lakṣmaṇa's importance is hinted at in Lakṣmaṇapurvaja (Lakṣmaṇa's elder brother): Thus each is characterised by the other. In the _praṇava_, the _śeṣī_'s inportance is prominent as in the chariot of Arjuna ( where Arjuna is prominent and _Śrī_ Kṛṣṇa is not, being only the charioteer ); in the word Nārāyaṇa, the _śeṣī_'s importance is prominent as in the Rasamandala (the Rasakrida described in the Bhāgavatam), where _Śrī_ Kṛṣṇa is all-important and the Gopis not so.

Even in the _praṇava_, though verbally the _jīva_ is prominent, the prominence, so far as the purport is considered, is of the Protector or Saviour.

The _jīva_ who appears in the _praṇava_ as of the form (ākāra) of _jñāna_, both in his essential nature and in his attribute, and also as being atomic (aņu), is described in the word Nara as eternal (without change or deterioration.) Further since Narāh means 'the multitude of naras', it makes clear the fact of the _jīva_s being different from one another. If (on the other hand) we take the word Nārah to mean those who have their origin from Nara (_Bhagavān_ ), it indicates that the _jīva_s have _Brahman_ for their cause (in so-far as their embodiment is concerned). Owing to these additional meanings appearing in the word (Nārāyaṇa), the two words serve a purpose ( and are not redundant).

(When the word Nārāyaṇa is taken as a bahuvrihi compound which can be split into Nārāh ayanam yasya), the word ayana is in grammatical co-ordination with Nārāh. By the word ayana, such ideas as their (nārāh) being pervaded by _Bhagavān_ are to be understood. The meaning of the śruti  that in regard to many chetanas who are eternal, one _Cetana_ who is eternal is the cause of their attaining the desired objects--this meaning may also be seen here.

It is true that the _jīva_ is, according to the _pramāṇa_s, eternal. When he was described before as taking his origin from _Brahman_, what was meant was that, in respect of his body which is his attribute, the origin was from _Brahman_ (but not his essential nature, which is eternal.)

The other interpretations which are given in kalpas like Narayanatmaka are also similar to these.

In the _śloka_ :-- “Both sentient beings and non-sentient things which are all different from _Viṣṇu_ are called Nāram. He who has nāram as His ayanam (abode or resting place) is Nārāyaṇa" (in the light of this _śloka_) what was stated before (in Padmottaram), viz., Nārāh is the collection of all persons" should be taken in a wider sense (Upalakṣaṇa) to include also the collection of all _tattva_s (non-sentient included). Because even non-sentient matter is not perishable in its essential nature (_svarūpa_) and also owing to the continuity (pravāha) of the different states (avasthās) into which it changes, (even) non. sentient matter is eternal. Nārāh means therefore by implication (Upalakṣaṇa) all the _tattva_s which are eternal and which are denoted by the word Nara.

"Nara means also Nārāyaṇa for the following reasons : (1) While pervading all (beings and things), He (i. e.) Nārāyaṇa is na ra (one who does not change or deteriorate), for He is not tainted by the faults or impurities in them and by the sufferings which might be caused by them; (2) the verbal root nr means " to lead": He who leads (souls) is Nara : (3) In the Sahasra nāma, Jahnu, Nārāyaṇa and Nara are said to be the names of _Bhagavān_ : (4) In the passage, "The waters are the sons of Nara, the word Nara indicates only Nārāyaṇa and this is evident from the sentence in Vyasa_smṛti_ :-- "The waters took their origin from Nārāyaṇa and they alone became afterwards His ayana or resting place". So the eternal and Supreme Ruler who leads all (to Himself ) is called by the name Nara.

In the _Ahirbudhnyasamhitā_ (we find the following _śloka_s : “Those that are related to nara are nārāh. That nara is _Puruṣottama_. It is He that confers knowledge on those that have sought His protection. It is He that dispels all (their) ignorance. Wherever He may be, He does not updergo any change. Hence He is called Nara, because He is always the same (na ra), Sentient beings and non-sentient things that are related to Him are His _śeṣa_s. They are supported by Him, controlled by Him and created by Him. He has entered into them for supporting them. Therefore are they called Nārāh (because they are sup ported, created and controlled by Nara). He controls all nārās; that is, by being within them, He pervades them in order to do such things as sustaining them. The nārāk are helpful (to us) in ander standing Him, for, by their existence is His existence understood. He is the ayana or abode of nārās and they are always His abode. To souls that are nārāh, He is the supreme end to be attained and also the means or _upāya_ of attaining Him ". This interpretation makes it clear that those attributes which define the essential nature of the Supreme Being such as(satyam, jñānam and ānandam) and the qualities or attributes of the essential nature so defined, such as compassion, His activities and the specific forms assumed by Him and likewise the three kinds of sentient beings, (the bound, the released and the eternal) and all non-sentient things — all these are meant by the word nārāh. From all this it may be inferred that He has the attribute of being the support of all except Himself. Hence it declares also that He stands by Himself and in Himself (alone). From this, the delusion maintained by men of perverted vision (Advaitins) that Purusho tama, who pervades, supports, controls and masters them and the nārās who are related to Him are identical in their essential nature-this delusion will disappear, since it is evident that He is the soul of all and that He has such glories as that of being denoted by all words.

The word nara (meaning . 'one who does not change') brings out the meaning of the clarificatory texts in the _śruti_ (where Brahman is declared to be satyamn, the Real that is un ch_aṅgī_ng). The word nāra which means those things which have their origin in Nara as declared in the passage : "Those reals or _tattva_s that are born of Nara are called nārāh”-this word brings out the meaning of the śruti that declares _Brahman_ to be the ultimate cause of all; the word ayana brings out the meaning of the texts prescribing forms of meditation or worship (as leading to the attainment of ends desired by men).

Such texts as those in the Subālopanishad declare that the Supreme Being who is the inner self of all and who has all kinds of kinship (to us) is Nārāyaṇa. (By this declaration) these passages state that the Supreme Being is no other deity than Nārāyaṇa.

Those who are relatives in the world became relatives (to us) by the will of _Bhagavān_. “O, Best of  deities, Thou art my mother. Thou art my father: Thou art my kinsman: Thou art my _guru_ : Thou art my learning: Thou art my wealth. So Thou art by all ", The Lord is my master who is my benefactor, He is my father, ny kinsman, my king." " Thou art the world's father, its mother, its beloved son, its affectionate friend, its wellwisher and its _guru_ : Thou art the goal to be attained and also the _upāya_ or means by which it is to be attained. I am Thine, I am sustained by Thee. I am Thy servant. I am one who considers Thee as the highest benefit. I am one who has performed _prapatti_ to Thee. Therefore the burden of protecting me is Thine". The Supreme Ruler is thas one who is the unconditioned relative in every form. If He is pleased (with us), there will be no one who will be opposed to us, for it has been said :-- "He from whose favour all these people will become favourable (to us)--that Rāma is now soliciting the favour of Sugrīva, the best of monkeys", and "When Keśava," the best of deities, who loves His devotees, is pleased, (with a man), his mind becomes clear thereby and all creatures--those that move and those that do not move become favourable to him. “When _Bhagavān_ who is the God of all gods and who controls even _Brahma_ is gracious, all the three worlds become favourable". “_Iśvara_ is, by His very nature, "the well-wisher of all creatures ". If He is (at any time) differently disposed, it is due to the upādhi or circumstance of the _cetana_ (or sentient being) having disobeyed His command. Even that disposition (of _Iśvara_'s) will change (and become favourable) by some little gesture or consideration (_vyāja_). Have they not

declared: "Even after approaching _Śrī_ Raṅganātha who is so mad as always to take pity on His servants, why do we still continue to be afflicted by _samsāra_?"

THE MEANING OF THE DATIVE (FOURTH) CASE OF

THE WORD NĀRĀYAṆA (i.e.) NĀRĀYAŅĀYA:

We will now set forth the meanings of the fourth case such as " for the sake of some one" which will correspond with the meaning of the sentences to be shown hereafter :

Considered in the obvious and ordinary way, it may be thought that the fourth case is used because of the word _namas_ (which governs the fourth case (according to grawmar). In that view there is nothing noteworthy in the use of the dative case. This is the part of the Tiru_mantra_ which is the cause of the attainment of the fruit (desired), for it has been said: “That part of the _mantra_ (_mūlamantra_). which remains after the sixth letter counting from _namas_ (i.e.) a and which is after the fifteenth letter counting the consonants of the alphabet beginning with ka (i.e.) na, and leaving the consonantal part of ṇa that part which remains after the ì in Nārāyanāya, (i. e.) āya, is called the potent part of that _mantra_.' This part is concerned with the attainment of the fruit. According to some interpretations, the prayer for the attainment of the fruit is found here. There is no difference of opinion in regard to the statement that the meanings of a word differ in accordance with the purpose, the context, the mark or sign, the propriety, the locality and the time of its use and not by the were word as such. One of the meanings of the fourth case that are accepted is sampradūna (ie) to make the word indicate the person to whom a thing is given and who thereby becomes its seshin. Here in the fourth case Nārāyaṇāya in Tiru_mantra_, it is true that what does not belong to _Iśvara_ is not given to Him, for the _jīva_ is always Nārāyaṇa's _śeṣa_ and belongs to Him. So it might be thought that the sampradana which is indicated by the fourth case does not apply here. But in as much as the _jīva_ offers to _Iśvara_ what already belongs to Him for protection by Himself, it may be held that the fourth case indicates sampradana and Ahirbudbnya (Siva) commented in this manner on the dative or fourth case in the Vyāpaka _Mantra_s :

"The surrender or offer of the self which is shown to be subordinate or _śeṣa_ is indicated by the fourth case in such words as _Viṣṇu_ (i.e. Namo followed by _Viṣṇu_). When the qnestion is asked: "To whom is this self which is subordinate offered or surrendered for the sake of protection ", the answer is " to _Viṣṇu_". Thus Vishou is indicated by the fourth case". This is a commentary also on the fourth case in words like Nārāyaṇa as the _śloka_ says 'in such words as _Viṣṇu_'.

In this Tiru_mantra_, the meanings of the seven sacred letters beginping from na have been separately stated in the _mantra_. _smṛti_s and these meanings have been summarised as follows by some  _ācārya_s in passages like the following :- "The meaning of na is looking after the welfare of all, helping to incline the wind (of the _jīva_) towards Paramapada and destroying those unworthy qualities of the self which are opposed to it. Since the letter ma signifies doing what is good to those who have sought (Him), helping to expand their attributive _jñāna_ (knowledge), and securing for them the respect of others : these are said to be its meanings by those that know. The letter ‘na’ signifies giving up scepticism, rendering service always to _Bhagavān_ and doing the work of the ācārya which consists in leading the _śiṣya_ to Parumapada. These benefits will, in the opinion of those that know the _mantra_, accrue to those that meditate on this letter. Those that meditate on the letter rā will acquire the love of the Lord, give up the love of those that sre other than the Lord and protect the kingdom (from evils). By the letter ya, wise men acquire the eagerness to adopt the Yoga necessary for attaining _Bhagavān_ and also its fruit.

From the letter ’ņā’ one acquires the desire to praise the Lord and the command of language necessary for praising Him. The letter ‘ya’ causes dread in (the minds) of Yakshas, Rākṣasas, Vethala, and goblins (bhūtas). Those that know the _mantra_s have thus described the function of the different letters ".

Thus Tiru_mantra_ which has been rendered free from the stain arising from perverse controversialists with the help of a careful study of the interpretations derived from grammar, nirukta and the like - will, like a mirror, reveal clearly the essential nature of the Supreme Being, and also whatever is difficult to see in regard to one's own essential nature.

THE ATTRIBUTES OF _BHAGAVĀN _ TO BE MEDITATED

UPON WITH REFERENCE TO TIRU_MANTRA_:

When we reflect in accordance with the _pramāṇa_s, on the essential nature of the Supreme Being, who is the deity indicated by this (_mantra_) in all the forms which are explicitly stated and which are also implicit in this _mantra_, we should reflect on the following qualities of His in principal and on other excellent traits connected with them:- such qualities as His being the protector : His protectorship being the result of His very nature: His protectorship extending to all, the many ways of His protection, correspondiog to the nature of the thing to be protected, His being the protector at all times, His being the protector in all places, His protection being of all kinds, His protection being directed by His own interest, the omniscience so essential for a protector, His omnipotence, the protection being irrevocable by any except His own will, the irresistibility by others of His protection, His supreme mercy, His expecting an occasion for protection, His requiring from the _jīva_ just a pretext or _vyāja_ for extending His protection, His accessibility to all those who have sought His help. His nature being such as may ever be relied on (for succour), His having as His attribute (_Lakṣmī_) who will recommend the pardon of those who have committed offences (17), His being the _śeṣī_, His beiug the Seshī under all conditions and at all times and to all, His freedom from being _śeṣa_ to any one else, His being the _śeṣī_ to those who admire His attributes and qualities, His being the _śeṣī_ in association with His consort, His being without equals or superiors, His being worthy of the surrenderiog of the self as an offering (_havis_), His being different from non-sentient matter, from souls in bondage, from souls in _mukti_ and from the eternal sūris (_nitya_s), His being the cause of others being _śeṣī_s in relation to certain things (28), His being an independent doer, His being capable of inspiring _jīva_s with such qualities as knowing, His being the inspirer of all activities, His not being inspired by any one else, His permitting of what is being done, His being the witness of all karmas or rites done, His co-operation (in _karma_ s), His inducing those who have sought succour to do what is pleasing (to Him), His inducing them to do what is beneficial (to themselves), His being the unconditional object of worship, His readiness to be at the disposal of others (when they have done the right thing), His being the _Siddhopāya_ ever ready to redeem (the jita), His being the cause of the _jīva_ adopting the sādhyopaya (_bhakti_  or _prapatti_), His commands being expressed in the _śruti_s aod _smṛti_s, His being the ruler who punishes (the evil doer), His equal treatinent of all, His being sympathetic to those who seek His help, His being the cause of _avidyā_ and the like, His being incapable of a_vidyā_ and the like (_karma_ ), His readiness to dispel a_vidyā_ (ignorance) of those who have sought His protection (48), His being free from any change in His essential nature, His being free from any change in His character or qualities, His readiness to lead all (the _jīva_s) to the attainment of Himself, the creation maintenance and destrnction of the world being His līlā or sportive activity (52), His being the principal subject of all Vedanta (Upaniṣads), His being the material cause of everything, His being the instrumental cause of everything, the irresistibility of His will, His having all (beings and things) as His body, His being denoted by all words, His adoration being performed by deans of all _karma_ s, His being the grantor of the fruits of all _karma_ s, His being the kinsman to the _jīva_ in every form, His universal pervasiveness, His unsurpassed subtleness, His being the support of everything. His being His own support, His being of the nature of satya, His being of the nature of _jñāna_, His infiniteness, His being of the nature of bliss, His being pure (and spotless) His possession of countless and unnamed attributes in His essential nature which has been defined by certain specific attributes like satyam, _jñāna_m, ānantam, anandam, amalatvam, His having an eternal, divine and auspicious form, His having states like _Para_ (the supreme) _Vyūha_ and others, His incarnations being satya, (facts of history), His possession of His own svabhāva or nature even in the state of incarnation, His incarnations being free from the touch of _prakṛti_ or matter, His incarnations not being the result of _karma_ , His incarnations having no fixed or appointed time of occurrence, His incarnations being the overflow of multi. tudes of qualities which are to serve the purposes of those who seek succour (from Him), His being pure and fit for contemplation in all states, His having _Lakṣmī_ as His companion in all states, His possession of divine ornaments, weapons, queen, abode, attendants, furniture, door-keepers, retinue, and the like (81), tha power which He has of causing the separation of the gross body from the self, His being the resting place of the _jīva_s for repose, His dispensation of special favours to all _jīva_s at that time, His lighting up of the opening of the _Brahma_ Nadi for the entrance of the self, His enabling the self to enter it, His being the cause of the emergence of the self out of the opening of the _Brahma_ nādi, the appointment by Him of Archis and other escort for the self, His leading the self through the gateway of the sun, His being the Cause of the self emerging out of the sphere (anda) of the material universe, His leading the self to the bank of the river Viraja, His being the cause of the separation of the subtle body from the self, His granting, to the self, of a transcendental (non-material) body, His being the cause of the self being welcomed and honoured by the divine Apsarases, His causing the self to enter the Brahmic fragrance and the like, His being the cause of the self being welcomed and honoured by the eternal süris and the released souls (muktas), the regard shown by Him up to the time when the self rises to the couch, His being the cause of the self enjoying perfect blies, His being the principal goal of attainment, His being responsible for all kinds of service rendered with the body, without the body[^93] and with more bodies than one, His possession of all objects of desire, His enjoyment of unsurpassed bliss, His being an object of upsurpassed enjoyment, His being an object of enjoyment in all forms, His being favourable, by His very nature, at all times, His bestowal to the self of bliss perfectly similar to His own, His inability to endure separation from thuse who seek succour from Him, and his being the cause of the self never returning to samsára. (108).

[^93]: Service without the body: Perhaps this should be taken to mean anubhava or experience.]

SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_:

इह सङ्ग्रहतश्श्रीमान् गोप्ता शेषी समाधिकदरिद्रः ।  
शरणं सर्वशरीरी प्राप्यस्सेव्यश्च साधुभिर्भाव्यः ॥

(Thus) here in Tiru_mantra_, the Lord is to be reflected upon by good men in a concise form (in the letter a) as the consort of _Śrī_ (_Lakṣmī_) and as the Saviour:(in the dative or the fourth case whose affix has been dropped) as the _śeṣī_, and as destitute of equals and superiors : in the word _namas_ ) as the _upāya_ or means of attaining Him: (in the word Nārāyaṇa) as the in-dwelling Self of all, (and in the fourth case of that word) as the object of atlainment and as the Person to whom service is due.

THE QUALITIES OF THE JIVĀTMĀ:

In the same way, when the _jīva_tma who is to attain the Supreme Being, which is the object of his attaioment, reflects on himself with the help of the Tiru_mantra_, he should note the following principal qualities of his own, which are indicated explicitly by the words themselves and which lie implicit in their meaning and other qualities connected with them, which are all accepted on the authority of the pramāṇ as : 'That he has to be redeemed by _Bhagavān_ and _Śrī_ (_Lakṣmī_), that he cannot be saved by any one else, that he has one who will protect him in all places, at all times, and in every manner, that he has a Saviour who has noble qualities, that he has one (_Lakṣmī_) to recommend

him (to the Lord's mercy), that he is the servant of the Lord and (His consort) _Lakṣmī_, that he is their eternal servant, that he is their unconditional servant, that he is not entitled to be the servant of anyone else, that, in his essential nature, the self is _jñāna_ (knowledge), that it is bliss, that it is self-luminous, that the self shines to itself, that the self is denoted by the word 'I', that the self is atomic (anu), that it is subtle (sukshma), that it cannot be cut (burnt and so on), that the self or soul is different from the twenty four _tattva_s or reals, that (in its essential nature) the self is pure, that it is different from _Iśvara_, that the self is a knower (having kaowledge as its attribute), that the _jīva_ has, by nature, the capacity to enjoy all things as agreeable, that he is competent to desire the supreme end of life, that he is fit to be commanded (by the Supreme Being), that he is fit to render service, that be has in him the power to have a direct perception of all things, that he is entitled to have unsurpassed bliss, that he is a doer who can act subject to the will of the Supreme Being, that he is a master (of certain things) under certain conditions or upādhis, that he is the _śeṣa_ of the devotees of the Lord, that he is their servant, that he is destitute of _upāya_s other than the Lord, that he is steeped in such things as _avidyā_, that his knowledge is capable of expansion with the help of (suitable) instruments (karana) and the like, that be is beset by the fears due to _samsāra_, that be should look forward to the removal of _avidyā_ and the like, that he is destitute of any means (of attaining the end), that he has such things as the good-will of _Iśvara_, that he should seek and obtain a good _ācārya_, that he is competent to adopt _sādhyopāya_ (_bhakti_  or _prapatti_), that he should stand firm in the _upāya_, that he has great potency, that he may be called an object of creation, destruction and the like in virtue of his having the body as an attribute, but that the self is imperishable, that the self is one among many, that the selves are countless, that the selt is pervaded by _Iśvara_ (who is its in-dwelling Self), that he is subject to the control of _Iśvara_, that he is supported by _Iśvara_, and that as a consequence of these, the self is the body of _Iśvara_ that the _jīva_ is the cause of the sportive delight

(lilā rasa) of _Iśvara_, that he is entitled to be the instrument for the Lord's enjoyment (bhoga) (in _Nityavibhūti_), that his passage to his goal depends on _Iśvara_, that the attainment of that goal depends on _Iśvara_, that he should seek neither worldly prosperity nor kaivalya, that he should eagerly long for the attainment of _Bhagavān_, that he should become free from all _avidyā_, that the self would manifest itself in its essential nature, that the self is capable of visualising everything (in the state of _mukti_), that his sole enjoyment should consist in the experience of _Bhagavān_ in every form, that he is capable of having unsurpassed bliss, that his being an enjoyer is (only) for the enjoyment ot of _Bhagavān_, that the self (in its realised state) can take any form and the like at will, that its will is irresistible, that the self will have perfect resemblance to the Lord except in regard to those uncommon qualities or attributes that define His essential nature, that the sell's delight is in rendering every kind of service to _Bhagavān_ and that the self will never return to _samsāra_ (after attaining _mukti_). (67).

SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_:

पदत्रयेऽत्र संक्षेपाद्भाव्यानन्यार्हशेषता ।  
अनन्योपायता स्वस्य तथानन्यपुमर्थता ॥

In the three words of this (Tiru_mantra_), we should reflect, in brief, on our being entitled to be the _śeṣa_, of no one other than the Lord, that we have no other _upāya_ than the Lord, and that we have no other end to attain than the Lord.

Thus the Tiru_mantra_ has ( as stated in Nāradiyakalpam) everything that a man ought to know. From it one can understand the essential nature of _cit_ (sentient beings ) _acit_ (non-sentient matter) and _Iśvara_, as well as the differences among the _jīva_s themselves. The Tiru_mantra_ also teaches the unconditional differences between the _jīva_ (the individual self) and the Supreme Sell, as, the former is _śeṣa_ and the latter _śeṣī_. It determines Also the person of the Supreme Deity who is both the material and the instrumental cause of the whole universe. Therefore even those who live in the same locality as those that meditate on the Tiru_mantra_ in this manner will never have delusions such as.the following :- " There is no _Iśvara_ or God"; "_Iśvara_ is attributeless"; "_Iśvara_ is absolutely indifferent (to the welfare of the _jīva_s), "His god.head is a mere reflection or image which has no reality" • His divinity is the result of some special _karma_  performed by Him". “He is occasionally subject to such things as _karma_ ". "The three gods, _Brahma_, _Viṣṇu_ and Siva, are of equal rank", "The three gods mentioned above are really one : " The Supreme Reality or Tattva is someone beyond these three gods", "One of these, Brabma and Siva, is _Iśvara_". "The essential nature (_svarūpa_) of _Iśvara_ is subject to change or modification". "The material cause and the instrumental cause can never be the same", "The _jīva_ and _Iśvara_ are only a single self". "The difference between the _jīva_ and _Iśvara_ is due to certain limiting factors or conditions (upādhi)". "The _jīva_ and _Iśvara_ are eternally (both) different and non-different," " The _jīva_ is _śeṣa_ only on account of his _karma_ ". "The _jīva_ is at times _śeṣa_ and at other times not a _śeṣa_". "The _jīva_ is inert (_jaḍa_)". "The _jīva_ is, in his essential nature, knowledge (and does not possess knowledge as an attribute)". "The _jīva_ is eternally free from bondage". "The _jīva_ only seems to enjoy (i.e. his enjoyment is not real but illusory). "The _jīva_ is not a doer or agent". " The _jīva_ is a doer or agent independent of _Iśvara_". "The self laats (only) until the pralaya". "The _jīva_ lasts only until _mukti_ (and then becomes one with the Supreme Being)". There is only one _jīva_ (all the others are illusory)", "The _jīva_ stands self-supported". "The _jīva_ is, in his essential nature, an effeci baving its origin in a cause." "The _jīva_ can, in no sense, be considered as an effect (even with regard to His body and the like)", "The _jīva_ can attain his end only by _karma_ ". "The _jīva_, in the state of release from _samsāra_, is like a stone (having no knowledge and the like)". "The _jīva_ finds delight only in his own disembodied self". "The _jīva_ is absolutely independent of _Bhagavān_". "The _jīva_ is one with _Iśvara_". "The _jīva_ is without such things as activities". "The _jīva_ can separate and unite (with _Iśvara_)". "The _jīva_s vary in the bliss that they will enjoy after _mukti_ ". "The _jīva_s have such differences as being fit to have only salokya and the like ", and other such delusions due to perverted systems of religious thought and to those who are outside the pale of Vedic religion.

So also weakness of faith in the Consort of _Śrī_ as a Protector, the search for other Redeemers, the protest  [See page (89 of the book ).] against being dependent on God, the delusion of being the unconditional _śeṣa_ to others, reverence to other deities, association with those who are their devotees, and, likewise, the delight in serving those who are unfit for service, such delusions as that the body and the soul are the same, such delusions as that the self is independent of _Bhagavān_, the earning (of money or other things) for one's own use, offence to the devotees of _Bhagavān_, forgetfulness of the fact that one is helpless and destitute of _upāya_s, a longing for the continuance of life in _samsāra_, the fear that the soul will suffer annihilation, the taste for doing what is improper, the classification of men into friends and foes, the seeking of other kinsmen (than _Bhagavān_ ), the desire for other ends (than the attainment of _Bhagavān_), averseness to the supreme goal of life and other such hindrances to one's firm stand in one's essential nature, in the real _upāya_ and in the end in view - all these ( delusions) will never approach them.

SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_:

इह निजपक्षविरुद्धैरीदृशनिष्ठाविरोधिभिश्चान्यैः ।  
द्विचतुष्कसारवेदी गङ्गाह्रद इव न गच्छति क्षोभम् ॥

The person who knows the essence of Ashtūkshara will never be deluded by these and other ideas which are opposed to his system and his way of life. In no circumstances are the waters of the deep pool of the G_aṅga_ disturbed :

TEN WAYS OF CONSTRUING AND INTERPRETING

TIRU_MANTRA_:

We shall now consider in what manner the Tiru_mantra_ should be considered as forming a sentence or sentences and the meaning of such sentence or sentences:

The Tiru_mantra_ is considered as being a single sentence, as being two sentences and as beiаg three sentences, in different traditions. So also the meanings of the sentence or sentences are reflected opon in many ways:

ONE SENTENCE-INDICATING _UPĀYA_.

When it is looked upon as a single sentence, the connection of words is to this effect :-" Adoration to Narayaṇa whose nature is such as can be ascertained from the _praṇava_ (_aum_), for it has been said: "Praṇava" is the word that denotes _Bhagavān_." (It is true that) the praṇava itself is the name of _Bhagavān_, but there is no repetition or redundancy in another name being used, viz,, Nārāyaṇa, for, as stated in Śāṇḍilya _Smṛti_ and the like, the _aum_ (or _praṇava_) is not of much avail, because its meaning by itself is not definite". Therefore, in the Vyāpaka _mantra_s, the other name is for the purpose of indicating the particular (deity). This way of construing the sentence, when considered in the light of the gross interpretation described in such places as the Ahirbudhnya Samhita (see before) will make it (Tiru_mantra_) appear as indicating the _upāya_. However the essential nature (of the _jīva_) and the supreme goal of life are also implicit in it (for, without a knowledge of them, no _upāya_ can be adopted).

ONE SENTENCE INDICATING _KAIÑKARYA_.

(2) Considering such passages as " (They) fold their hands together (in anjali) and with great delight utter the word _namas_". the _mantra_ is held also as indicating the activity of the _śeṣa_, namely, service, which is included in the supreme experience of _Bhagavān_ in _mokṣa_. This form of service must (necessarily) be preceded by a reflection on (one's) essential nature or "svarūipa  (i. e.) that of being a _śeṣa_ to the Lord. This can be made use of also by those who have adopted the _upāya_ (_prapatti_), even in their present state, when they can realise the happiness (of that service to the Lord).

TWO SENTENCES INDICATING SVARUPA:

(3) When these two ideas become well-established, it is necesary to have a clear and distinctive knowledge of one's essential  nature. For that purpose, the Tiru_mantra_ may be looked upon as being two sentences (a) a Nārāyanāya um - (b) _namas_ (or na mama) meaning (a) "I am the unconditional _śeṣa_ of _Bhagavān_ alone who is indicated by the letter a (in _aum_) and who has such attributes as being the universal Redeemer and the support of all and (I am the _śeṣa_) of no other. (b) I do not belong to myself, neither am I the unconditional master of anything nor have I any (absolute or unconditioned) independence. If it be asked " Will there not be redundancy owing to the letter a and the word Nārāyaṇa being both the names of _Bhagavān_? The answer is (as follows):-- In that case one of the two should be considered as An adjective to the other) for the purpose of indicating the special qualities (such as protectorship) contained in its etymological interpretation. The redundancy would also cease if we construe the sentence into " (I am the _śeṣa_) of Nārāyaṇa who is denoted by the letter a in (_aum_)". Do we not see the word '_Bhagavān_', which is His name, being employed in apposition or grammatical co-ordination (sāmānādhikaraṇya)) with the word · _Vāsudeva_! (in the _Vāsudeva_ _mantra_ )? There is no redundance, as the word Nārāyaṇa serves a purpose, being used for removing all doubts as to which deity is the ultimate universal cause denoted by the letter which is the origin of all letters (namely a ). The order of words in a sentence is dependent on the ways in which they are recited (according to tradition); but the construction or syntactical con. nection of the words is in accordance with the meaning.

When thus taken as two sentences, the whole of the Tiru_mantra_ is descriptive of the essential nature (_svarūpa_) of the _jīva_. In the light of this coustruction, namely, that of describing the essential nature, the ancients used to say: "Be born in Tiru. _mantra_, grow up in _Dvaya_ and stand firm in _Dvaya_ alone". \* Birth' is due to the birth of a kaowledge of one's essential nature and the disappearance of the state which preceded it. This may be seen (from the verse): “Before I had a knowledge of my essential nature, I was like one unborn. After attaining that knowledge, I was born and I do not forget this". That is acknowledging, of one's own accord, that one is the _śeṣa_ of no one other than _Bhagavān_, that one is not subject to the will of any one other than _Bhagavān_ that, consequently, one has no other interests than being _śeṣa_ to Him and that one has no other saviour than He. "Growth' means the adoption of the _upāya_ resulting from a knowledge of a particular thing that has to be performed as being suited to one's competency. "To stand firm in _Dvaya_ alone" means to become well-established in this _upāya_ and in the (know. ledge of the) fruit arising from it, without associating oneself with any other _upāya_ and without any other end in view. Thus Tiru _mantra_ and _Dvaya_ combined together reveal the _svarūpa_, the _upāya_ and the end for which the _upāya_ is adopted.

TWO SENTENCES INDICATING THE _UPĀYA_ :

(4) In this construction of Tiru_mantra_ into two sentences, some consider that the whole of Tiru_mantra_ has, for its purport, the surrender of the self with its accessories. In that case, the m in praṇava should be considered to be in the nominative or first case. By the principle of the offering of the _havis_ (or oblation), Tiru_mantra_ would then mean "This unconditional oflering, namely, the self or soul is surrendered to Nārāyaṇa who is denoted by the letter a as His responsibility and who is the deity subject to no conditions or limiting factors (upādhi). In this unconditional sacrifice of the self, the word _namas_ (na mama) would come to mean that one dissociates oneself from oneself and says, " The burden of my protection is not mine." As when (an offering is made) with the words: “This is for Indra and not mine", here also, the two sentences are essential; one to express the connection (of the offering) with the Supreme Being and the denial of its connection with oneself. Also in this surrender with the words _namas_ (na mama), the purport may also extend to the denial of one's being an agent or doer absolutely independeat of the Supreme Being. The two sentences may also be considered to suggest the meaning; "The burden of my protection is of no other (than _Bhagavān_) nor is it my own".

That Tiru_mantra_ has, for its purport, the offering or surrender of the self was stated in the _Nitya_ as follows :- "After offering the self to the deity with the mūlamantra etc" This idea is shown also in _Śrī_ _Vaikuṇṭha_ _Gadya_ as follows: "Praying that _Bhagavān_ should accept one for eternal service to Himself alone, one should prostrate oneself and offer the soul to _Bhagavān_ with the utterance of the sacred mūlamantra",

TWO SENTENCES INDICATING PURUṢĀRTHA:

(5) In each of the two sentences, some understand a word (like syām) meaning 'I pray that etc' or 'May I' etc. (In that case the first sentence would be _aum Nārāyaṇāya syām_, and the second _na mama syām_), and their meanings would be:

“May I render service to Nārāyaṇa denoted by the letter a! May there be no hindrances to this!" Tiru_mantra_, as a whole, would then be a prayer for the attainment of what is desired and the removal of all undesirable things and this is considered the supreme end. In that case the reflection on one's _svarūpa_ is implicit in it. Similarly even when the Tiru_mantra_ is considered to have, for its purport, only the indication of one's _svarūpa_, (as in the third meaning) it would, by suggestion or implication, indicate the specific end to be attained. The _upāya_ and the prayer would then be known from the respective _pramāṇa_s which ordain _prapatti_.

It is often said that Tiru_mantra_ has, for its purport, the knowledge of _svarūpa_, of _upāya_ and of _puruṣārtha_, because a knowledge of these which did not exist before is acquired from it. The knowledge of these is prāpya (to be acquired) and the Tiru_mantra_ from which this knowledge arises may therefore be said to be prāpyapara (i.e.) to have, for its purport, the knowledge of these three. But the expression prapyapara does not mean that Tiru_mantra_ has, for its denotation, this knowledge. It denotes the _svarūpa_, _upāya_ and _puruṣārtha_ and not the knowledge of these which afterwards arises from it. (For example: the word \*cow' denotes the animal called 'cow'; but when the word 'cow' is employed, we got also a knowledge of the cow. From this we should not say that the word 'cow' denotes the knowledge of the cow. It denotes only the cow though, subsequently, the knowledge also arises. To put it in other words, the denotation of the word and the items of knowledge which may arise when the word is employed are two different things. 'Cow' and knowledge of the cow' are two different things.

THREE SENTENCES:

When Tiru_mantra_ is considered as consisting of three. sentences (there are several ways of understanding the meaning:) (6) & (7) The _svarūpa_ or essential nature (of the _jīva_) and his supreme goal (_puruṣārtha_) are stated by the words themselves and the _upāya_ is implicit in the meaning (though not expressed by the words); (8) or the _svarūpa_ and the _upāya_ are stated by the words themselves and the _puruṣārtha_ is implicit in the meaning: (9) or the _upāya_ and the _puruṣārtha_ are stated by the words themselves and the _svarūpa_ is implicit in the meaning (10) or the _svarūpa_, the _upāya_ and the _puruṣārtha_ ( all the three) are stated (distinctly) by the words themselves.

(6) If it be asked how this is, the answer is as follows: The first two words indicate _svarūpa_ and the third word _puruṣārtha_.

As stated in the following _śloka_ : I am the property (_śeṣa_) na mama of only _Bhagavān_ who is denoted by the letter a; I do not exist for myself : He who is denoted by the word 'Nārāyaṇa', which means the person whose abode or dwelling place is the multitude of the etermal nārās (i.e.) _jīva_s --- To Him the varied forms of service which I should reader in virtue of my nature should appear (to me) in all places and in all states". (as stated in this s'loka ), the praṇava and the _namas_ clarify the _svarūpa_ ; and the third word Nārāyaṇāya with the predicate understood (Namely syām) is a prayer for the attainment of the goal, in view of the idea of existing for _Bhagavān_ expressed (already) by the _praṇava_. The form of the prayer would be “May I be for Nārāyaṇa!" In this view, the prayer for the removal of hindrances (to _śeṣa_tva) results from the meaning (and not from the words themselves, because the attainment of the _puruṣārtha_ is impossible without the removal of hindrances). As stated in the _Dvaya_ and in such passages as "Thou shalt enjoy thyself on the slopes of the hills in the company of Sītā", since the one to whom service is due has a spouse, the meaning would here also be, “May I be for Nārāyaṇa as well as for _Lakṣmī_!". If the predicate be needed, a word like bhaveyam (May I be) should be understood. This prayer has indeed been made in such forms as the following:-- “May I render faultless service remaining with _Bhagavān_ constantly in all places and in all states." "Vouchsafe upto me Thy grace so that I may render service to Thee". "I pray for eternal service to Thee" and " I should be Thy eternal servant,"

“Existing for His sake' is eternal; so there is no need to pray for it; this relationship of existing for His sake (as His _śeṣa_) is already expressed by the praṇava. Therefore prayer is inside here for service (to _Bhagavān_), which is the overflow of the full and perfect enjoyment of _Bhagavān_ and which contains within itself all other ends of life as in the common saying: "In the ocean is a small puddle (i.e.) the larger contains the smaller within it)".

SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_S:---

॥ अत्र स्वलाभापेक्षापि स्वामिलाभावसायिनी ।  
स्वामिप्रयोजनापेक्षाप्यतस्स्वानन्दहेतुका ॥

Here in the dative or fourth case ( in the word Nārāyaṇāya ), although the _jīva_ expects his owa gain (namely, the attainment of his _puruṣārtha_ ), yet it ends in the Master gaining pleasure or delight. (Therefore there is no violation of the proper function of the, _śeṣa_). (Likewise) desiring that the Master should gain conduces also to one's own bliss or _ānanda_.

" Whether it is said, "I beg for service which would please Thee" or " Thou shouldst find delight in having my service" - in either case, both are gainers". (This is the idea). It has been said:-" Food is of two kinds, that which has three qualities and that which has six qualities: That which has three qualities[^94] is for those bound by _karma_ ; the other is for others". Here the food with six qualities is the enjoyment of the (six) qualities of _Bhagavān_ and also the different kinds of service which result from them and which are most enjoyable.

[^94]: That which has three qualities : material objects of enjoyment having sattvam, rajas and tamas.




(In the _Brahma_ Sūtras) it is said that since the _śruti_s indicate that there would be perfect resemblance or equality (bhoga mātra sāmya) only in regard to enjoyment between _Brahman_ and the _mukta_, the perfect equality is only in enjoyment and in _jñāna_ or knowledge. Therefore there is nothing (in the _śruti_s or the sūtras) opposed to the _mukta_ being a _śeṣa_ (to _Bhagavān_) which pertains to his essential nature (_svarūpa_) and, as a result thereof, rendering service (_kaiṅkarya_) to Him. It has been explained in _Śrī_ _Bhāṣya_ and elsewhere that when, in the state of aspiring to _mukti_ and in the state of _mukti_, the _jīva_ meditates on his being _Brahman_, what is meant is that this contemplation is only in virtue of the self or _jīva_ being the body of _Bhagavān_. Therefore this notion of "I am _Brahman_" is indeed the result of the body (here the self or _jīva_) being dependent on the inner self (_Bhagavān_ ) and existing only for the fulfilment of His purposes. (Therefore there is no impropriety in the self being _śeṣa_ to _Bhagavān_ even in the state of _mukti_ ). The service that is rendered in the state of release or _mukti_ comes from the very nature of the self: it is free from the pairs of opposites[^95] , constant and un-intermittent, and produces unlimited delight. In the state of aspiration to _mukti_ (_mumukṣu_) the service that is rendered for its own sake is due to the circumstance or upadhi of some good _karma_  done in the past; it has to endure the pairs of opposites (dvandva ) such as heat and cold and pleasare and pain; it is interrupted by sleep and other such (hindrances) and the delight arising therefrom is limited.

[^95]: pairs of opposites like pleasure and pain, heat and cold etc.




Here all activities of the _jīva_ which do not form the service of _Bhagavān_ and which do not fit in with His commands will yield adverse results of some kind or other. Among those activities which are permitted by _Bhagavān_, those which are for the purpose of attaining _svarga_, cows and the like will yield fruits which may appear to be pleasant but which are mingled with many undesirable elements. Therefore they are, for that reason, hindrances. So, as stated in the _śloka_ : "One should give up the performance of those actions which are aimed at attaining the three ends, namely, _dharma_, wealth (artha) and pleasure (kāma)," the aspirant to _mukti_ may perform those rites or actions in relation to _Bhagavān_ which are the means of securing _bhakti_  and _jñāna_ and also of promoting the glory of _Bhagavān_ and of Bhāgavatas without caring for any other fruit. Since these rites or actions are not productive of life in _samsāra_, they would be included in the proper form of service, The state of being a _śeṣa_ to _Bhagavān_ indicated in the _praṇava_ extends to that of being a _śeṣa_ to His devotees in so far as laid down in the _pramāṇa_s, as a consequence of the _jīva_'s absolute subjection to and sole existence for Hiin, which are indicated appropriately by the word _namas_.



So the _kaiṅkarya_ or service to _Bhagavān_ which is desired in the word Nārāyaṇāya extends to His devotees. This idea is expressed in such _śloka_s as the following :- "I am greatly pleased with those who have devotion towards my devotees. Therefore one should honour them greatly", and. “Therefore in order to obtain the grace of _Bhagavān_, one should please His devotees. By this the Lord becomes heartily inclined to show His grace. There is no doubt of this ".



The saying that “dependence upon others is miserable" means (only) that the dependence on the worthless, which is due to past _karma_ and which is not suited to one's _svarūpa_, is the cause of misery. Being subject to (the will of) _Bhagavān_ and tadiyas is the prescribed goal suited to one who realises the essential nature of his self and it is therefore the cause of unsurpassed delight. "Tadiyas" or 'Bhāgavatas' means those who feel a delight in being the servants of the Lord.



There are some who maintain that service to His devotees (tadiyas) logically follows when one desires to serve Nārāyaṇa who his for His attribute Nārās, for service to the substantive in Nārāņām ayanam iacludes (they say) service to Nārāṇām (all nārās ) which is the adjective or attribute. (If the logic of this statement that what is prescribed for the substantive should be considered as prescribed also for its adjective or attribute, (in other words ), if being the attribute is itself the cause (of being honoured and served), then every thing that is denoted by the word Nārās here, such as _Brahma_ and the other gods, the enemies of _Bhagavān_, cattle and the like, would come under those to whom service shonld be desired. If it is said, “He desires to serve men's sovereign", it does not follow that he desires to serve men also who are the adjectives of the sovereign (in the phrase 'men's sovereign"), So also, by mere logic, the desire to serve Nārās will not become proved. (That will require _pramāṇa_s for proof). Therefore only this much can be said:- By the authority of the _pramāṇa_s, since the aspirant desires to do what is pleasing to the Master, he desires to serve those who are dear to Him and who realise that they are His _śeṣa_s and have no other interests in life. Even in the experience of the state of _mukti_, the experience of everything else indicated by the word Nāra which is included in the experience or enjoyment of _Bhagavān_ - even this is not understood from (the) logic (of the adjective and the substantive ). It is understood from the authority of the _pramāṇa_, (namely the _śruti_) which says " He sees all, and attains all things".



So far the Tiru_mantra_ was construed as having three sentences among which the first two were held as indicating the _svarūpa_ of the _jīva_ and the third as indicating the prayer for the attainment of the _puruṣārtha_ or goal aimed at.



(7) Different from this is the construction of Tiru_mantra_ into three sentences of which the _praṇava_ brings out the _svarūpa_ or essential nature, _namas_ forms the prayer for the removal of hindrances or evils, and the _puruṣārtha_ which will result from that renewal is indicated in Nārāyaṇāya syām ("May I be for Nārāyaṇa !") That the _namas_ in Tiru_mantra_ too, like the _namas_ in _Dvaya_ has, as its purport, the prayer for the removal of hindrances - this interpretation, too, is explained in Bhattar's _Nitya_ in the _śloka_s: “As stated in the _praṇava_, I am the _śeṣa_ of _Bhagavān_; in spite of it, I wily subdued by the notions of 'I' and Mine' owing to (my) past _karma_ . The word _namas_ states that, hereafter, I should reinember my being _śeṣa_ to _Bhagavān_ and render service to him". Therefore the syntactical construction becomes (in this interpretation): Aham na mama syam "I shall not be my own _śeṣa_ or na mama kinchit syat" "May I have no hindrances'" Syām or Syāt being understood. So it amounts to a prayer for tha complete removal of all hindrances such as _avidyā_ or ignorance, _karma_ , the impressions left by them (vāsanas), the taste or inclination (ruchi) and the association with _prakṛti_ or matter. This has been shown in the passage in Vedārthasangraha, where it is said. " Owing to beginningless _avidyā_ or ignorance, two kinds of _karma_, good and evil (_puṇya_ and _pāpa_) have been flowing like a stream. On account of this, the _jīva_ becomes enclosed in bodies of four kinds: _Brahma_ and the other gods, men, animals and plants. So in accordance with the notion entertained by the _jīva_ regarding his nature, the streain of _samsāra_ increases in its volume. In order to get rid of the fear caused by it which is hard to resist etc.” So also it ia said, " In order to protect the souls of samsārins whose nature is such that they have false notions of 'I' about the body, bad ways of life due to these (false notions) and the impure body which results therefrom, the Lord of the _Nitya_suris was born into all sorts of castes and species ".



It may be asked :-" When a prayer has been made for the removal of hindrances, where is the need for another prayer for the attainment of the desired end? Will it not follow as a natural consequence? Has it not been said: “When the _jīva_ attains _Brahman_, those qualities or attributes of his which are natural to him and which were, till now, hidden begin to shine forth. This is revealed by the word Svena in the _śruti_". "In the same way as the brightness or radiance of a gem is not produced (anew) but is a natural consequence of washing away the dirt covering it), so also _jñāna_ or knowledge is not produced in the soul (anew). When a tank or a well is dug, the water and the ether (space) are not created but simply come into prominence (having already been there). It is only what already exists that is manifested clearly, How can there be the production of a thing which did not exist ? So also on the removal of undesirable or evil qualities, qualities like knowledge begin to shine forth. They are not created anew, for these qualities are eternal in the _jīva_ (since they belong to his essential nature) "?



The answer to this question may be expressed as follows :



SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_:

स्वतस्स्वार्हं यथाभागं पुत्रः पितुरपेक्षते ।  
सापराधस्तथा दासः कैङ्कर्यं परमात्मनः ॥

"The son begs of his father for his share of the property, though it is lawfully his. In the same way the servant (the _jīva_) who has offended (the Master) begs of the Supreme Being that he should be permitted to render service ". There is nothing inappropriate in the _jīva_ who has lost what he is entitled to, praying thus:-- “May I have what is my sharel Be Thou so gracious as to pardon my offence;"



From the passages quoted above, it would appear also that just  when the hindrance is removed the radiance natural to the gem begins to shine by the will of God, as stated in." All things exist as such only by Thy will", so also such things as the expansion of jñāna which naturally belong to the _Jīva_, are manifested as a result of the Lord's will, which is of the form of the compassion natural to Him.



But it may be asked: "In a [^96] system of thought which holds that the non-existence (of a thing) means the presence of some other thing, the removal of hindrances should, by itself, be the attainment of what is desired. Hence will not the separate prayer for it be redundant? Besides has not the author of _Śrī_ _Bhāṣya_ declared: “The disappearance of _avidyā_ (literally, ignorance; _karma_  ) is itself _mokṣa_"?

[^96]: Vísishtadvaitins hold that the non-existence (of a thing) is simply the existence of some other thing and not a category apart. For example, when we say, "There is no pot on the floor', the non-existence of the pot is merely the existence of the floor. Tarkikas hold, on the other hand, that non-existence or the absence of a thing (abhava) should be considered as a separate category.




To that question the answer is as follows: - For the sake of some purpose, a single thing may be indicated (in two ways), in its essential nature (_svarūpa_) and also in a form that is opposed to it. So (here ), it is called the attainment of what is desired and the disappearance of what is not desired, because of the intention to signify a special purpose. In the state of _samsāra_, the dis. appearance of something that is undesirable may be another undesirable thing or the disappearance of what is desired and what is not desirable alike. But in the state of _mokṣa_, since every thing (without exception) that is undesirable disappears, whal remains is all agreeable So the two (the disappearance of the undesirable and the attainment of what is desired) were stated separately in order to show, with great regard, that the former state (_samsāra_) is most undesirable and the latter most desirable, since it (is free from all undesirable elements and) has only what is desirable. Further the two have to be stated separately, since the withdrawal of punishment by _Bhagavān_ and such things as the expansion of the _jīva_'s knowledge are different things. It is not improper to pray separately for these two things since the remission of punishment by God which is the cause of the contraction of knowledge and the like is different from such things as the expansion of knowledge, service and the like which results from the disappearance of the contraction of knowledge, service and the like, which were the results of that punishment.



There is also another reason for two separate prayers - In some other systems of thought (like that of the Tārkikas), _mokṣa_ means the disappearance of all undesirable things and the attainment of a state similar to that of a stone (with no positive content in the form of enjoyment or bliss). In order to show that _mokṣa_ in our system is not of that kind, bat has a positive content of enjoyment or bliss, the two are stated as being separate and also to show that in the attainmeot of _Bhagavān_ (in _mukti_), there is no such thing as an alloy of misery or pain just as there is in attaining such states as the position of Indra."



Thus if it is held that the _svarūpa_ and the prayer are expressed explicitly by the words themselves, the _upāya_ prescribed by the sütras, for the attainment of the end in view (_puruṣārtha_) namely, the _Sādhyopāya_, is implicit in the meaning of _namas_ which states the disappearance of undesirable things in the case of the man destitute of all other _upāya_s as a result of _bharanyāsa_.



(8) _SVARŪPA_ AND UPÃYA :



Since the prayer for the _puruṣārtha_ is not a mere desire but the soliciting of a protector, the _aṅga_ and other accessories may be considered also as implicit and not expressed. The Tiru_mantra_ would then mainly indicate the _svarūpa_ and _upāya_. If we split Nārāyaṇa into nārāņām ayanam yena "He by whom He becomes the resting place of nārās (the world of _jīva_s), the word ayana may be considered also as indicating the _upāya_, for He is the _upāya_.



(9) _UPĀYA_ AND PURUṢĀRTHA :



SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_

केचित्तु चरमश्लोके द्वये चोक्तक्रमादिह । भरन्यासपरं तारं शेषं फलपरं विदुः ॥

Some_ācārya_s considered that, as in the order in which these are expressed in _Dvaya_ and in the _carama_ _śloka_, here, in Tiru_mantra_ also, the praṇava (tāram) expresses _bharanyāsa_ or the surrender of the responsibility of protection and that the other two words _namas_ and Nárāyaṇāya express the attainment of the end in view.



(10) THREE SENTENCES INDICATING RESPECTIVELY



_SVARŪPA_, _UPĀYA_ AND PURUṢĀRTHA



Tiru_mantra_ may be considered also as stating all the three, viz., _svarūpa_, _upāya_ and _puruṣārtha_ in that order. In this case the praṇava states the _svarūpa_ or essential nature of the _jīva_ (as _Bhagavān_'s _śeṣa_), the _namas_ states the _upāya_ and what remains (i.e.) Nārāyaṇāya states the prayer for the _puruṣārtha_ or the attainment of the end in view.



The details concerning these three should be understood by a study of the Vedanta śāstras. The construction or interpretation given above of Tiru_mantra_ has resemblances to the order in which the _tattva_, the _upāya_ and the _puruṣārtha_ are explained in the Vedantha _śāstra_s. Does not that śāstra proceed in this way? So the first two chapters (adhyāyas) (of the _Brahma_ sūtras), the Supreme Real (_Brahman_) and the reals subordinate to it are determined. In the third chapter, competency (_adhikāra_) and accessories (_aṅga_s) are stated along with the _upāya_ and in the fourth chapter, the fruit or the attainment of the goal is explained by way of conclusion. The essential nature of the Supreme Real and that of the lower reals explained in the first two chapters (adhyāyas ) and the fruit or goal of attainment explained in the fourth are the same for the man who has adopted _prapatti_ as a direct and independent means or _upāya_. The shortcomings and sufferings in _samsāra_ which are dealt with in the sections (pāda) on Vairagya and Ubhayalinga in the third chapter and the Redeemer's being opposed to all that is of the nature of blemish (heya) and His being the sole possessor of all auspicious qualities --- these, too, must necessarily be understood by the _prapanna_ who is an aspirant to _mukti_. The different forms of meditation or worship (_upāsana_) of _Brahman_, which are treated of in the third section (pāda) of the third chapter (of the _Brahma_ sütras ), should be adopted by those who are competent for them (i.e.) those who have adopted _bhakti_. The man who is not competent for them and who is destitute of other _upāya_s should realise that these forms of meditation are too high for him and adopt nyāsa as his _upāya_. For, as stated in the following sub-sections:- Nānā śabdādi bhedāt (_Brahma_ _sūtra_s 3-3-56) (The forms of meditation or worship or vidyās concerning _Brahman_) are different from one another, for their names are different and vikalpah avisiṣṭa phalatvat (3---3--57). (Any one of them may be adopted as there is no difference in the resulting fruit). _Nyāsa_ is different from the other _vidyā_s and in yielding the fruit conferred by them, does not require any other aid. The man who has adopted _upāsana_ (or _bhakti_ ) should perform the rights and duties pertaining to his _varṇa_ (caste) and _āśrama_ (stage of life) as an accessory or _aṅga_ to the _vidyā_ or form of meditation as stated in _Brahma_ _Sūtra_s (3.4.33)  The man who practises _bhakti_  should perform the duties of his _varṇa_ and _āśrama_ as an _aṅga_ to _bhakti_ ." The man who has adopted _prapatti_ as a direct and independent _upāya_ should perfom these rites and duties as having been enjoined by _Bhagavān_ and for their own sake (without expecting any gain or reward), for it is said in the _Brahma_ Sūtras (3.4 - 32). “Since they are enjoined, yajnas and other rites become the duties of the (respective) āsramas". If this is understood the, _svarūpa_, _upāya_ and _puruṣārtha_ which are explained in the Sārīraka _Śāstra_s (_Brahma_ sūtras) are all to be found within the sacred _Aṣṭākṣara_. We have already explained how the five truths that ought to be understood may be found in this. (Chap. 4).



SUMMARY OF THE TEN INTERPRETATIONS OF



TIRU_MANTRA_ GIVEN ABOVE:



Thus the ācāryas consider Tiru_mantra_, which has innumerable meanings within it, as having ten (different) meanings in accordance with their respective tradition: When the Tiru_mantra_ is considered as a single sentence, it is thought of as indicating (1) the essential nature (_svarūpa_) of the _jīva_ and (2) his activity as a _śeṣa_. When coosidered as two sentences, it is thought of as indicating (1) the essential nature of the self and (2) the surrender (of the self) by a positive and a negative statement, Namely, (The burden of protecting me is _Bhagavān_'s : it is not mine) and so also (3) as indicating a prayer for the _puruṣārtha_. When it is considered as three sentences, it is thought of in the following ways:- (1) The first two words indicate the _svarūpa_ and the third word indicates the prayer: (2) The _praṇava_ indicates the essential nature or _svarūpa_, and the other two words indicate the prayer for the removal of undesirable elements and for the attainment of the desired end. (3) In the same manner, the first word indicates the _svarūpa_ and the other two indicate the _upāya_, (4) the first word indicates the surrender (of the self) and the other two indicate the prayer for the attainment of the fruit ( desired), (5) The three words indicate respectively the _tattva_, the _upāya_ and the _puruṣārtha_.



When some of these meanings are considered as the main interpretations, the others, too, should be looked upon as being implicit in the meaning, though not expressed explicitly by the words thenselves.



SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_S :

॥ तदेवं पदवाक्यार्थैस्तत्त्वविद्गुरुदर्शितैः । तत्तत्कुदृष्टिकथितं निरस्तं योजनान्तरम् ॥

Therefore by the interpretations of the words and the sentences thus taught (to us) by the ācāryas, who have realised the truth, other interpretations stated by those who are outside the pale of Vedic religion and by heretics (within that fold) have been rejected.



The man who has attained a clear and sure knowledge of Tiru_mantra_ which cannot be shaken by those outside the pale of Vedic religion and by heretics -- that man has been described as follows in the _śloka_ :- "He has mounted the (top most) storey of the palace of the knowledge of Tiru_mantra_ and has obtained freedom from all anxiety (about himself). The wise man looks down (from there) at ignorant people suffering for lack of this knowledge, like a man on the top of a mountain looking at people standing below (it)". The knowledge referred to in the following _śloka_ : "Food, sleep, fear and sex are common both to animals and to men. The superiority of men to animals consists in their possession of knowledge. Those who are without knowledge are like animals"-the knowledge referred to here is this clear and sure knowledge. (The man who has this knowledge) will never be moved or troubled by praise or censure as stated in the _śloka_ : " Here he is called a wise man (pandita) who like the (unsullied) waters in the depths of the G_aṅga_ will never feel elated by praise or pained by censure". "In the land where the man who has a true knowledge of Tiru_mantra_ and who stands firmly in its meditation, is honoured, there will be no disease, no famine and no fear of robbers". As stated in this _śloka_ : No such evil will occur there. It has been stated by those who are proficient in Ayurveda : “Adoration to that unique physician who killed, without exception, all diseases like rāga (desire) which are chronic, which lie spread over all parts of the body and which cause feverish activity, ignorance, dissatisfaction (with everything)". The _śloka_ quoted above really means, in accordance with the above statement in Vāgbhatam, that (in the land where a knowledge of Tiru_mantra_ is honoured) there will be no such principal diseases as rāga or desire, no contraction of knowledge, for knowledge has been described as wealth or _Śrī_ and no such great robbers as those who steal the self which cannot be stolen by external robbers. (The person who considers the self which truly belongs to _Bhagavān_ as his own is a robber).



OTHER VYĀPAKA _MANTRA_S



The ideas contained in the other Vyapaka _mantra_s which contain the words (_Viṣṇu_ and _Vāsudeva_), namely Namo Vishnave preceded by _praṇava_ and _namo_ Bhagavate Vāsudevāya preceded by praňava are just those which have been declared as existing in Tiru_mantra_. As interpreted by Ahirbudhnya such qualities as pervasiveness, splendour, entrance (into all) or immanence and will, which are deduced from the respective verbal roots are additional qualities in the Supreme Being, _Viṣṇu_ and decisive of His being the Supreme Deity". The meanings of the word "_Viṣṇu_” as derived from the root Vish which means "to pervade, 'vas' which means to 'shine', ‘vis’ . which means 'to enter" and ‘ish’ which means 'to will' and so also the meanings of the _Vāsudeva_ derived from ‘vasati’, ‘vasayati’, which mean respectively, "He dwells within all" and 'He makes all dwell within Himself" and ‘Divyati’ which means 'shines', from which follow His being the support of all, His being free from any taint due to contact with them, His sportive activity, and His will to conquer - all these meanings are contained in parts of the word “ Nārāyaṇa".



As stated in the _śloka_ : “Whatever a man ought to know is all contained in _aṣṭākṣara_, that is, the Vedas viz., Rik, Yajus, Saman and so also Atharvan and other collections of words," as stated therein, this _aṣṭākṣara_ is, by itself, the revelation of all that is desired by the aspirant to _mukti_, in relation to the _tattva_ (Truth) and _hita_ (the means or _upāya_ for reaching the goal). A single utterence of it is equal to frequent repetitions of all the vedas, for it has been said, "Whatever fruit is gained by those who repeat the Rik, Yajus and Sama Vedas many times -- that fruit is gained by the man who utters the _aṣṭākṣara_ _mantra_ only once. A single utterance of this _mantra_ is equal to a repetition of all the Vedas. Though, as stated in the _śloka_: "In proportion to the faith that a man has in the _Mūlamantra_ does he attain the ends he desires, it is impossible to estimate adequately its greatness" (though, as stated in the _śloka_), there are degrees of success varying in accordance with the degrees of faith, the potency (of the _mantra_) is boundless (incapable of being measured) in the case of those who have great and intense faith (mahā visvāsa ) in it. Since in that _śloka_ (100) it is not specifically stated by whom it is impossible to measure its potency, it may be inferred that even Nārāyaṇa who propagated this _mantra_, who is the subject of this _mantra_ and who is, by nature, omniscient and who incarnated as Nara and Nārāyaṇa and propagated (by precept and practice) the Scripture without letting it become extinct-that even Nārāyaṇa knows that its potency is not capable of being measured. Tirum_aṅga_i Alvar who wis initiated into this _mantra_ and its meaning by the seer of this _mantra_ (_Bhagavān_, who is also its deity, has declared as follows:- "If thou shouldst, with the help of the _mantra_ of eight letters, always enjoy _Bhagavān_, who appears at the end of the Vedas which form the wealth of Brahmins, thou shalt be happy."



TAMIL VERSE:

ऎट्टुमामूर्त्ति यॆण् कण्णनॆण्डिक्  
कॆट्टिऱैयॆण्बिरगिरुदि  
ऎट्टु मा वरैगळीण्ड्र वॆण्गुणत्तो  
नॆट्टॆणु मॆण्गुणमदियोर्क्  
कॆट्टुमामल रॆण्सित्ति यॆण्बत्ति  
यॆट्टुयोगाङ्गमॆण्सॆल्वम्  
ऎट्टुमागुण मॆट्टॆट्टॆणुङ्गलै  
यॆट्टिरद मेलनवु मॆट्टिनवे. ( 38)

Those wise men with eight qualities who meditate on the _mantra_ of eight letters which treats of _Bhagavān_ who is possessed of eight qualities and who created the eight-bodied (Rudra), the eight-eyed (_Brahma_), the eight quarters and their eight guardians, the eight _prakṛti_s, and the eight great mountains-these wise men have, within their (easy) reach, the eight great flowers, the eight siddhis or super-natural powers, the eight kinds of _bhakti_  or devotion, the eight _aṅga_s or accessories of _yoga_, the eight kinds of wealth, the eight great qualities, the eight times eight arts or kalās and the rasa or emotional state or sentiment which is beyond the eight rasas, namely, the emotional state called sānti or serenity of spirit.





EXPLANATION OF TAMIL VERSE:



To those great and wise men who meditate on the sacred _aṣṭākṣara_, which treats of the Supreme Ruler, who is the (ultimate) cause of all and who is opposed to everything of the nature of blemish and is, at the sametime, the abɔde of all auspicious qualities -(to these great men) whatever is desired by them among the spiritual virtues, the eight forms of wealth and the like is never beyond their reach. The 'eight-bodied' means Rudra who obtained the boon of having eight bodies, namely, the five elements (bhutas-earth, water, fire, air and ether or space), the moon and the sun and the man who performs a yajna or sacrifice; the eight-eyed refers to _Brahma_ who has eight eyes because of his four faces; the eight quarters; the eight guardians of the eight quarters such as lndra, the eight _prakṛti_s are the eight _tattva_s or reals like avyakta, mahat and ahañkāra, the eight great mountains means the eight chief mountain ranges[^97] ; 'who created these means the Supreme Being possessed of eight qualities who created all these; His eight qualities are being (1) without subjection to _karma_ , (2) without old age, or (3) death, or (1) grief, (5) or hunger or, (6) thirst, (7) the possession of eternal objects of enjoyment and (8) omnipotence or the ability to accomplish whatever He desires ; to those wise men possessed of wisdom with its eight _aṅga_s who meditate on the _mantra_' means to those enlightened men who are possessed of understanding with its eight _aṅga_s and who meditate on the sacred _aṣṭākṣara_ which is the chief _mantra_ among those that treat of _Bhagavān_.' The eight _aṅga_s of wisdom are " quickness of grasp, retention of what is learnt, remembrance, the ability to explain, inference, modification of what has been stated (to adapt it to new situations), reason, the knowledge of Truth - these are the eight qualities of understanding ". The eight great flowers are the following :-"Non-Violence (_ahimsā_) is the first flower, control of the senses is (another) flower: then comes the flower called compassion to all creatures, then the flower of forgiveness in special, then the flower of knowledge, the flower of tapas and so also the flower of contemplation (_dhyāna_) and the flower of truth these eight kinds of fiowers are most pleasing to _Viṣṇu_, The eight siddhis are inference, the knowledge of words, learning Vedanta, freedom from the three kinds of suffering; that in the body brought about by animals, and that due to the (anger of the ) gods, like storm and lightning. the possession of friends and charity. The eight forms of devotion are the following :- Love to God's devotees without an eye to their faults, delight in the worship offered to Him by others, an eagerness to listen to stories concerning _Bhagavān_, changes in the voice and the body and tears in the eyes while listening to them, efforts to worship _Bhagavān_, freedom from hypocrisy in one's relations towards God, constant meditation on God, and freedom from the expectation of rewards from God. The eight _aṅga_s of _yoga_ are yama, _niyama_ and the rest (_āsana_, _prāṇāyāma_, _pratyāhāra_, _dhyāna_, _dhāraṇa_ and _samādhi_); the eight forms of wealth are:- the power to contract one's body to a much smaller size, the power to make one's body assume larger dimensions, the power to make oneself light (of weigbt), the power to make oneself heavy, perfect control over oneself, control over others, the attainment of whatever is desired, and success by merely desiring it.

[^97]: They are Himavān, Vishada, Vindhya, Mālyavān, Pāriyātraka. Mandara. Malaya and Meru.




The eight great qualities are those which manifest themselves after _mukti_ or those stated in the _śloka_ "Eight qualities enable a man to shine (above others): They are:-- right to knowledge, good birth, control of the senses, learning the meaning of the Veda from the ācārya, the skill to win over one's rivals, freedom from talkativeness. charity in proportion to one's wealth and gratitude." Eight times eight kalās are the sixty four arts and crafts. The eight rasas are sṛṅgāra (love), vīra (heroism), karuņa, (pathos); adbhuta (wonder); hāsya (humour); bhayānaka, (terror or fear) bībhatsa (the grotesque or gruesome) and raudra (anger).The ninth is s'anti. Among these, there is nothing which he cannot have at his desire. The imperfect development of spiritual qualities results from want of earnestness in meditation. The inability to attain the right forms of wealth is due to neglect. The delay in the release from _samsāra_ is due to weakness in the desire for it. That is why it has been declared "The _mantra_ „  _namo_ Nārāyaṇa - secures whatever is desired."



SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_ :

अविद्यापूतनोन्मुक्तैरनवज्ञातसत्पथैः । असदास्वादसव्रीडैरादिष्टमिति दर्शितम् ॥

Thus (we have shown here what was taoght by (_acāryā_s) who were free from the demon of ignorance (_avidyā_), who never ignored the path of the righteous and who shrank in shame fronı the enjoyment of petty pleasures.



TAMIL VERSE:---

उयर्न्द नङ्गावलनल्लार्गुरिमै तुऱन्दुयिराय्  
मयर्न्दमै तीर्न्दु मट्रोर् वऴियिण्ड्रि यडैक्कलमाय्  
पयन्द वन्नारणन्बादङ्गळ् सेर्न्द पऴवडियार्  
नयन्द कुट्रेवलॆल्ला नाडु नन् मनु वोदिनमे. ( 39 )



We have been initiated into the excellent _mantra_, which enables us to give up all association as _śeṣa_s with those who are other than our great Redeemer, and to realise that we are souls (and not mere bodies) (_praṇava_) We have awakened from (our) ignorance and being without any other refuge, (we) have sought the feet of Nārāyaṇa who created (all the worlds) (_namas_). As the result of our initiation into this _mantra_, we (now) seek to perform that service which the ancient devotees (the eternal sūris render with eagerness (Nārāyanāya).



SANSKRIT _ŚLOKA_ :

इत्थं सङ्घटितः पदैस्त्रिभिरसावेकद्विपञ्चाक्षरै

-रर्थैस्तत्त्वहितप्रयोजनमयैरध्यात्मसारैस्त्रिभिः ।  
आद्यस्त्र्यक्षरवेदसूतिरजहत्स्थूलादिवृत्तित्रय-

स्त्रैगुण्यप्रशमं प्रयच्छति सतां त्रय्यन्तसारो मनुः ॥ ६३ ॥

This _mantra_ which is thus constituted of three words that are composed, respectively, of one, two and five letters and which treats of the three things to be known, namely, _tattva_ (the truth), _hita_ (the _upāya_) and _puruṣārtha_ (the end to be attained) that are of the very essence of Vedanta-this _mantra_ which is the foremost of all _mantra_s, which has the _praṇava_ of three letters which is the

origin of the Vedas, which has the word having the three meanings, sthūla (gross) _sūkṣma_, (subtle) and para the (suprerme) (namely, _namas_) and which has in it the word (Nārāyaṇa) that forms the essence of the Upaniṣads--this _mantra_ confers, on those who seek no other reward. freedom from _prakṛti_ with its three qualities (i.e. from _samsāra_.)

इति श्रीकवितार्किकसिंहस्य सर्वतन्त्रस्वतन्त्रस्य श्रीमद्वेङ्कटनाथस्य वेदान्ताचार्यस्य कृतिषु श्रीमद्रहस्यत्रयसारे  
मूलमन्त्राधिकारः सप्तविंशः ॥  
श्रीमते निगमान्तमहादेशिकाय नमः ॥



------------------------







