+++
title = "19 The Tibetan Practice of the Mantra Path"

+++
The Tibetan Practice of the Mantra Path

According to Lce-sgom-pa  

Yael Bentor  

The text translated here is an exposition of the Buddhist Tantric path written in  Tibet in about the twelfth or thirteenth century. It was chosen for the present  volume because of its relatively concise and straightforward style of explaining  Tibetan Tantra. The uncertainty concerning the author's exact identity, dates, and  sectarian affiliation need not concern us here. According to the testimony of the  text itself, its author relies (specifically in the section on the completion process)  on the authority of Naropa. The work from which our selection is taken, The  Outline of the Jewel Mound of Instructions (Man-ngag-rin-chen-spungs-pa'i-dkar-cha

is devoted to the entire Buddhist path. The five opening chapters are concerned  with general Mahayana topics, including the Bodhisattva path, the Perfection of  Wisdom, emptiness, the two truths, and the true nature of things. Our excerpt is  the first part of the sixth chapter entitled "The Teaching of the Practice of the  Mantra Path." The name of the author is given in the work variously as Lce-sgom 

rdzong-pa, Gces-sgom Mkha'-skyong-brag-pa, and other names. For the sake of  brevity we will simply call him Lce-sgom-pa (pronounced Cegompa). This intro duction will be devoted to clarifying Lce-sgom-pa's presentation of the Mantra  path as a guide to the translation. It will closely follow the logical progression of  the text itself. Some may prefer to read the translation first and the introduction  second.  

The author begins his essay by placing the Tantra/Mantra path within the gen eral context of the path to enlightenment. The Buddhist Great Vehicle (Mahayana)  is said to comprise two paths, the path of the Sutra and the path of the Tantra,  also called the Perfection of Wisdom and the Mantra path, respectively. According  to our text, the path of the Sutra was taught by the Buddha for people who are  only slightly afflicted by desire and who are able to renounce the world. This  seems rather tongue-in-cheek, since it is obvious that most people are greatly  afflicted by desire and are not able to renounce the world. It is precisely for this  great majority that the Mantra path was taught. 

MANTRA PATH : LCE-SGOM-P A 327  

Lce-sgom-pa distinguishes three methods for overcoming suffering in samsara,  which results from the emotions afflicting all unenlightened beings. These three  methods reflect the three paths within the Great Vehicle delineated by him - the  Sutra, Tantra/Mantra, and Great Seal. The Sutra path of the Perfection of Wisdom  is the classical method of the Great Vehicle based, for the most part, on the  bodhisattva ideal and the notion of emptiness. The Tantra path is further divided  into two - the common Tantric method, which Lce-sgom-pa calls the path of  purifying the mind in stages, and the path of the Great Seal (mahamudra), which  he defines, in contrast, as an instantaneous practice. This Great Seal is, according  to him, the pinnacle of all Mantra path practices, yet at the same time superior  to it. In the path of the Sutra, the afflicting emotions are regarded as adversaries  to be conquered with some countermeasure. The afflicting emotion of desire may  be overcome through nonattraction, aversion though loving kindness, and igno rance through correct understanding of Buddhist views. The Tantra path, on the  other hand, employs a homeopathic approach - a remedy of a type similar to the  affliction is applied. This method is stated in a famous verse from the Hevajra  Tantra (2.2.52): "By passion beings are bound and by that very passion they are  released." Other examples are a thorn stuck in one's finger, which may be removed  by another thorn, or an Indian washerman who removes the dirt from a cloth by  dirt itself (used in India as cleanser). These examples are easier to understand  than the one given in our text. Lce-sgom-pa emphasizes that the remedies of  corresponding type employed in the Tantra path are not the actual afflicting  emotions. Ordinary desire is cured not by ordinary desire but by sublime desire - desire that has been transformed. Hence, in the Mantra path as well, the ordinary  afflicting emotions are in fact renounced.  

How are one's afflicting emotions transformed? This occurs as part of the prac tice (discussed below) in which meditators transform themselves into enlightened  beings, and their world into the celestial mansion of the mandala in which they  abide. With such a transformation, their enjoyment of objects of desire is said to  be like that of enlightened beings who are making offerings to enlightened beings.  In this case, both offerer and recipient are said to experience perfect enjoyment  untainted by any trace of affliction, such as attachment, miserliness, or jealousy.  They realize that all offerings that appear as forms, sounds, tastes, and so on, are  in actuality nondual enlightened wisdom and emptiness. As such, they function  as objects of the senses that no longer induce ordinary clinging, but rather im 

maculate bliss. In other words, offerings made on the path to enlightenment serve  to transform ordinary attitudes with respect to offerings into a blissful mind that  realizes their true nature. One example of this occurs in the generation process,  wherein practitioners who have been transformed into enlightened beings express  their gratitude to these enlightened beings. Since the practitioners are no longer  distinguished from the enlightened beings, they generate from themselves another  mandala of enlightened beings that is like a reflection in a mirror. This replica  splits off from themselves in the same way that one butter lamp lights another,  without the first losing any of its light. In making the offerings to the enlightened  beings emanated from themselves, practitioners worship these enlightened beings, 

328 YAE L BENTO R  

express their gratitude to them, and accumulate merit on the level of conventional  truth. At the same time, at the level of the highest truth, they meditate on the  true nature of the recipients of these offerings as illusion empty of inherent ex istence. After making their offerings, the recipients of the offerings merge back  into the offerers indistinguishably, like water into water. On the basis of this  visualization, the practitioners meditate on all offerings, offerers, and objects of  offering as empty illusion. They realize that all appearances arise as the role playing of enlightened wisdom. The empty and unobstructed nature of everything  enables them to dissolve one enlightened being into another. Such is precisely  the true nature of things dissolving in the true nature of things. Therefore our  text explains, in words similar to those employed by Milarepa, "One enjoys in  the manner of enlightened beings making offerings to enlightened beings, of the  playfulness of enlightened wisdom in enlightened wisdom, and of the dissolution  of the nature of things into the nature of things. Thereby, the ordinary afflicting  

emotions that afflict one's stream of being are cleared away."  What is the method for overcoming afflicting emotions according to the Great  Seal? Here the meditators do not neutralize them with counteractive antidotes,  nor do they apply remedies of a similar type, but rather realize that they are the  result of their own conceptualization. The workings of the mind cause objects of  desire to appear in the way they appear, and bring about the afflicting emotions  that grasp at them. The example our text provides for the existence of afflicting  emotions is the appearance of water in the desert that arises from optical illusion.  Once the beholders comprehend the phenomenon of a mirage, they understand  the true nature of water in the middle of a desert, and their former mistaken  perception, which holds to the existence of this water, ceases. Because no antidote  is applied in this case, the afflicting emotions are said to be released or liberated  by themselves.  

This classification of the Great Vehicle into three paths that differ in their cure  for the afflicting emotions is not meant so much to illustrate historical develop ments within Buddhism as to serve as a didactic means for presenting the different  approaches and clarifying their unique features. The classification of the three  paths as gradual stages, ranging from the inferior to the superior, allows the  presentation of newer developments - such as the paths of Tantra and the Great  Seal - as both belonging to the Great Vehicle and surpassing it. This presentation  is modeled after the older method of the Great Vehicle itself, which presents  Buddhism in general as consisting of three paths, with the Great Vehicle included  within it in the highest position. In order to emphasize this parallelism, Lce-sgom 

pa first introduces the three vehicles for the path in Buddhism in general - those  of the Hearers (sravakas), the Solitary Buddhas (pratyekabuddhas), and the Bo dhisattvas - while adding that only the last of these is capable of leading to bud dhahood itself. The two others were taught for people with lesser capacities, as  skillful means for gradually leading them into the Great Vehicle of the Bodhisat tvas. Similarly, the paths of Mantra and the Great Seal are part of the Great Vehicle,  yet are reserved for practitioners with the highest capacities. 

MANTR A PATH : LCE-SGOM-P A 329  

Before practitioners may embark on the Tantric practices that lead to liberation,  they must receive initiation from their gurus. This initiation is called ripening  initiation, since it activates the disciples' capacities to engage in the practice. In  receiving initiation, the disciples gain the first inner experience of the meditation,  such as seeing themselves as enlightened beings. When both guru and disciple  are worthy, the disciple shares in the meditation of his or her guru. They also  share in the meditation of the entire lineage of teachers, who have achieved direct  experience in that meditation. Our text lists two essential roles of the initiation:  cleansing the disciples' impurities and endowing them with efficacy. The first is  said to purify the disciples' entire being - expressed in terms of their body,  speech, and mind - by removing obstacles that prevent access to the practice,  such as habitual tendencies. Each of the inner experiences in the initiation is  represented by an external symbolic ritual action. The purification is symbolized  by the vase initiation, in which gurus or their helpers pour consecrated water  from a decorated vase into the disciples' hands. At that time the disciples visualize,  in the space above themselves, a mandala of enlightened beings, with the female  enlightened beings holding up decorated vases filled with nectar, which they pour  on the disciples' heads. They are to feel that the nectar completely fills their bodies  and purifies them of all their defilements.  

The second role of initiation is to endow the disciple with the ability to perform  the practice. The literal meaning of the Tibetan word for initiation is "empower ment." It empowers disciples with the spiritual powers of the entire lineage of  gurus, rendering them appropriate recipients for the practice. Here the disciples  should visualize that the nectar filling their bodies transmits the powers of all  their gurus. The initiation consists of four parts, each empowering the disciples  with the capacity to engage in a successive practice on the path. First, the vase  initiation transforms disciples into vessels suitable for the generation process in  which they transform themselves into enlightened beings. Second, the secret ini tiation renders the disciples suitable vessels for engaging in the practice of the  subtle body, composed of cakras, channels (nadis), and winds (pranas). This prac tice is based on the practitioner's own body, in contrast with the following initi ation, which relies on another person's body. This is the initiation of enlightened  wisdom (jnana) with a consort (prajria) that consists of sexual yoga and turns the  disciple into a suitable vessel for engaging in meditation on bliss together with a  consort. The fourth initiation, which is nonconceptual, empowers the disciple to  practice the meditation of the Great Seal.  

According to the tradition of the new schools as followed by our text, the  Tantric system is divided into four cycles. In the lowest of these, that of Action  (Kriya) Tantra, only the first initiation, the vase initiation, is conferred, whereas  in the fourth one, that of Highest Yoga (Anuttarayoga) Tantra, all four initiations  are conferred. In the second Tantric cycle, that of Performance (Carya) Tantra,  and in the cycles beyond it, the five initiations of knowledge are conferred. These  five initiations transform one's five afflicting emotions and five aggregates into the  five enlightened wisdoms and the five buddhas (tathagatas) of the mandala. The 

330 YAE L BENTO R  

water initiation puts out the fire of hatred, actualizes the mirrorlike enlightened  wisdom, and transforms the aggregate of form into Vairocana. The crown initia tion destroys the mountain of pride, actualizes the enlightened wisdom of equa nimity, and transforms the aggregate of feeling into Ratnasambhava. The vajra  initiation overcomes the poison of desire, actualizes the enlightened wisdom of  particularized understanding, and transforms the aggregate of perception into  Amitabha. The bell initiation releases the chains of jealousy, actualizes the en lightened wisdom of accomplishments, and transforms the aggregate of condi tionings into Amoghasiddhi. The name initiation dispels the darkness of igno rance, actualizes the enlightened wisdom of the nature of reality, and transforms  the aggregate of consciousness into Aksobhya.  

In the third Tantric cycle, that of Yoga Tantra, the initiation that authorizes the  disciples to become teachers or gurus is also conferred. The complete set of ini tiations conferred in the cycles of Highest Yoga Tantra enables its recipients to  engage in the two main practices that will be explained below, the generation  process and the completion process. The initiations are of varying degrees of  complexity. According to Lce-sgom-pa, these depend on the preferences and eco nomic means of the disciple. In the most elaborate initiation, multicolored pre cious stones, or at least colored grain or powder, are used to draw the mandala.  In the Kalacakra initiation, conferred nowadays by the fourteenth Dalai Lama in  the West, it is such a colored-powder mandala that is used. Some mandalas have  even found permanent homes in European and Northern American museums.  This permanence goes against the intent of the traditional ritual, at the end of  which the colored-powder mandala is destroyed and scattered into a body of  water. Although an initiation based on a colored-sand mandala creates a profound  impression in disciples, a true disciple does not require any ritual or implement.  

The effect of the initiation is explained in terms of the disciples' basis, path, and  fruit. The basis is the disciples' ground state before receiving initiation. The initiation  purifies the basic condition of the disciples' body, speech, and mind. In terms of  the path, the four initiations endow disciples with the ability to engage in the four  practices on the path to enlightenment (the generation process, the practice of the  subtle body, the meditation on bliss that relies on a consort, and the Great Seal).  The fruit of these practices is an awakened or enlightened being, a buddha endowed  with the four bodies (or embodiments) - the emanation body (nirmanakaya), the  embodiment of enjoyment (sambhogakaya), the dharma embodiment (dharmakaya)  

and the embodiment of the essential nature (svabhavikakaya).  

Having explicated the initiations, Lce-sgom-pa explains the practices on the  path, beginning with the generation process. The generation process is so called  because, by means of visualization, practitioners generate themselves as chosen  enlightened beings at the center of a mandala. Our text emphasizes that regardless  of the visualization technique, this meditation is a progressive and gradual pro 

cess, in contrast to the instantaneous practice of the Great Seal. The first purpose  of this practice, as listed by Lce-sgom-pa, is the purification of ordinary conceptual  thoughts. Since classical Buddhism, conceptual modes of thinking have been 

MANTRA PATH: LCE-SGOM-PA 331  

counted among the core roots of samsara. Things do not exist in the way they  appear to the ordinary mental apparatus. By means of the generation process,  ordinary perception of the world and its contents - all its inhabitants - dissolves  away and is replaced with the mandala and the enlightened beings inhabiting it.  Through such practice, one conceptualization is replaced with another - though  the later conceptualization is somewhat more "true," since it is in this form that  actual reality appears to enlightened beings. However, the shift from one concep tualization to another demonstrates both the relative nature of each and the work 

ings of the human mind in creating such conceptualizations. The nature of mental  construction is more apparent with regard to the mandala than with regard to  the external world, and this serves to illuminate the dreamlike nature of ordinary  reality, as well. Eventually both conceptualizations will dissolve.  

The generation process aids not only in recognizing conceptualization as con ceptualization but also in utilizing the power of practitioners' minds to transform  and recreate their reality. The control achieved over the visualization of themselves  as enlightened beings at the center of a mandala can also be employed for ma nipulating the ordinary reality that has been replaced by this visualization. Once  the nature of the workings of the mind is realized, one can, by knowing their true  nature, create whatever appearances one wishes. Hence, one can "truly" transform  the ordinary world into that of the divine mandala, while comprehending the  true nature of this new reality.  

The second purpose of the generation process, according to our text, is the  actual engagement in the meditations of tranquil abiding (samatha) and penetra tive insight (vipasyana). These two meditations are the paradigmatic meditations  of classical Buddhism that the Tantra, being both unable and unwilling to discard,  appropriates. The Tantra path maintains that its practice not only fulfills both of  these meditations but also supersedes them. Tranquil abiding can be attained  through one-pointed concentration on the visualized enlightened being, while  penetrative insight can be accomplished by understanding the true nature of this  enlightened being as a dreamlike illusion, empty of intrinsic existence. This is in  addition to the other attainments of the generation practice.  

The third purpose of the generation process, according to the general Tibetan  tradition, is to prepare a basis for the completion process. It seems that the gen eration process has at times been taken to be an autonomous meditative trans formation able to achieve the goal of attaining buddhahood in and of itself. In  combining the different Tantric practices into a systematic path, however, the  generation process is usually allotted a position subordinate to that of the com pletion process.  

The fourth purpose is to attain the form body (rupakaya) of the Buddha. The  three or four bodies or embodiments of the Buddha are divided into the form  bodies and the dharma embodiment. Whereas the completion process is said to  accomplish the latter, the generation process with its visualization of oneself in  the form of a chosen enlightened beings considered to effect the realization of  the form body.  

In addition to the completion process performed in the cycle of Highest Yoga 

332 YAEL BENTO R  

Tantra alone, there is yet another practice by the same name that is performed at  the conclusion of the generation process in the various Tantric cycles. Lce-sgom pa points out that these two completion processes should not be confused, and  lists three types of completion processes that belong to the generation process.  The first is sealing with the four seals (the seal of union, the seal of dharma, the  seal of action, and the great seal), which effects the realization of the meditator  as an enlightened being whose true essence is nondual emptiness and appearance.  The second completion process within the generation process is meditation on  the enlightened being as illusion. Here, meditation on the form of the enlightened  wisdom with all its intricate details, as well as the practitioner's identification with  this form, is infused with a meditation on its illusory empty nature. The purpose  of the generation process is not to replace practitioners' fixations on their ordinary  existence and their ordinary world with yet another fixation on themselves as  enlightened beings in a wonderful celestial mandala. Therefore, the generation  process is not complete without this meditation on those enlightened beings as  intangible - a rainbow in the sky, having the nature of light empty of intrinsic  nature, yet another conceptualization of the mind.  

This is also the purpose of the third completion process within the generation  process, in which the visualization of oneself as an enlightened being at the center  of a mandala is gathered back at the end of the meditative session and dissolved  into emptiness. Everything that has been created out of the expanse of emptiness  dissolves back into this primordial state. This dissolution serves to demonstrate  the true nature of the visualization - an empty illusion - and to prevent attach 

ment to the reality created through the generation itself. In Highest Yoga Tantra,  the emphasis is often shifted from these three forms of completion to the com pletion process per se.  

The essence of this completion process is enlightened wisdom characterized by  three qualities - bliss, clarity, and nonconceptuality. The discussion is again ar ranged in terms of the basis, path, and fruit of the completion process. The true  mode of being of the bodily aspect at the disciple's basis (prior to embarking on  the path) is the subtle body that consists of channels, energies, and the pure  elements of the white and red drops. Whereas the coarse white and red drops  received from the father and mother respectively - drops that together produce  one's physical body - lead to rebirth in samsara, the pure white and red drops  lead into the spiritual birth of the mind of enlightenment. The true mode of being  of the mental aspect at the basis is a great bliss that is primordially empty, devoid  of essence, and lacking in any mental construct. By realizing the true mode of  being of their bodies, practitioners come to know the crucial points of the medi 

tation; and by realizing the true mode of being of their minds, they come to know  the crucial nature of the meaning that they should meditate upon. With the  realization of these two true modes of being, they proceed to the path of the  completion process, which consists of the three practices into which they are  initiated through the three higher initiations. The first of these is the practice in  reliance on one's own body that, according to our text, consists of the six yogasMANTR A PATH : LCE-SGOM-P A 333  

of Naropa; the second is the practice in reliance on the body of a consort; and  the third is the Great Seal. The fruits of this path are the four yogas of the Great  Seal (one-pointedness, lacking mental constructions, the singularity of plurality,  and the stream of innate nature without meditation).  

When it is instantaneous, the Great Seal is not a practice. A practice is a gradual  process with a beginning, middle, and end, composed of meditation, object of  meditation, and so on. In the nondual nonconceptual Great Seal, there is neither  meditation, nor object of meditation, nor meditator. These distinctions are the  source of the problem, since as long as one engages in conceptual thinking, one  cannot reach beyond it. Hence, the four yogas of the Great Seal are the natural,  spontaneous fruit of the prior practice on the path, and they may be seen as four  aspects of a single meditation. Still, in accordance with the faculties of the prac titioner, the four yogas may arise simultaneously, gradually, or by leaping to a  higher level, as Lce-sgom-pa points out.  

Four purposes are listed for the completion process. The first is relinquishing  any attachment to the visualized enlightened being and realizing that its nature  is suchness, just like that of any other phenomenon - a purpose quite similar to  those of the completion processes that belong to the generation process. The  second purpose is achieving a direct experience of great bliss that is indistinguish 

able from enlightened wisdom, through practices relying on one's own body and  the body of another. The third is the purification of cognitive obstruction, the  counterpart to the purification of emotional obscurations said to be achieved  through the generation process. The fourth is attaining the dharma embodiment  that complements the attainment of the form body realized in the generation  process.  

Next in the topics of discussion are practices undertaken outside the formal  meditation session, between meditation sessions or in postmeditation. Postme ditation is of utmost importance for the practitioner's meditative experience, and  Lce-sgom-pa devotes much space to it. Sitting in meditation withdrawn from  everything is not an end in itself. The purpose of meditation is to effect and  transform one's entire being. Hence, Lce-sgom-pa explains that after arising from  their formal meditation, practitioners should preserve their meditative experiences  and combine them with their daily activities. Those who have not attained mean ingful meditative experiences in their formal meditation should in the meantime  engage in religious practice between meditative sessions.  

Like the formal sessions themselves, these practices differ among the various  vehicles. Having renounced all sensual pleasures, Hearers and Solitary Buddhas  engage in bodily ascetic practices. Lce-sgom-pa refers ironically to the bodily  hardship and the difficulty of these practices, implying that these practitioners  may not achieve much beyond the hardship itself. Bodhisattvas also abandon  objects of desire, while practicing the ten perfections for the sake of leading others  to enlightenment. On this point, our text maintains that Tantric practitioners do  not renounce the objects of the senses, but understand their true nature. In con trast to the practices of the actual meditative session - which he mentions only 

334 YAE L BENTO R  

in passing, assuming the reader (or hearer) to be already familiar with them - Lce-sgom-pa describes the practices outside the meditation session in some detail.  These depend on the practitioners' meditative experiences. Beginners in medita tion engage mainly in practices performed between meditative sessions. Since the  great majority of the followers of the Tantric path are beginners, these are very  popular practices, in both senses of the word. They are considered to be conducive  to actual meditative experience, since they contribute to the accumulation of merit  and wisdom and to the removal of any impediments to the meditation that may  follow. Among the practices that our text lists are recitations of mantras, such as  the Om mani padme hum that springs constantly from the lips of so many Tibetans.  The yoga of food means that the daily meals taken between meditative sessions  are considered as offerings to the enlightened being one is practicing to become.  Tormas, generally, are food offerings made to one's enlightened beings and pro tectors. A mandal is a symbolic offering of the entire universe, the greatest offering  one could imagine. It exhibits both the importance of these offerings to the offerers  and their nonattachment to the material world. The seven-limbed practice, in its  Tantric version, includes prostration, offering, confession of sins, rejoicing in the  joy of others, seeking refuge in the Three Jewels, generating the Bodhisattva's  mind for enlightenment, and dedicating one's merit to all. The water offering is  made to hungry ghosts tormented by hunger and thirst, whose insatiable craving  is iconographically represented by their huge bellies and tiny mouths. Many Ti betans make daily offerings of water to quench their thirst. Tsha-tshas are small  images or stupas stamped in clay or water for the accumulation of merit. Often  they also contain ashes of one's parent or lama. Circumambulations of holy places,  temples, monasteries, and so forth also serve for the accumulation of merit.  Rounding out the list of these popular practices are the recitation and copying of  Buddhist scriptures, studying and understanding them, as well as teaching them  to others.  

The next stage, following that of the beginners, occurs when a slight inner  experience arises in meditative equipoise. This experience should be applied to  postmeditation activities. For example, when during their formal meditative ses sion practitioners engage in the generation process, they meditate on the illusory  empty nature of themselves as enlightened beings. In postmeditation they should  apply this realization to everything that appears to their senses. In a similar way,  they combine their inner realization during the completion process with their  ordinary activities in the external world. Not only are they to apply their medi tative experiences to daily life but their everyday experience should also serve to  sustain their formal meditation. In their postmeditation, the practitioners should  first understand that all phenomena appear to them in the way they appear as a  result of their own mental processes; and then realize that these mental processes  too are empty of inherent existence. Since everything is empty and unobstructed,  one thing can simply dissolve into another, which is tantamount to the dissolution  of the nature of things into the nature of things as Lce-sgom-pa describes.  The third stage of this postmeditational practice occurs when the slight inner 

MANTRA PATH : LCE-SGOM-P A 335  

experience evolves into a slight stability in the experience. In order to enhance  that stability, a special practice called "taming the engagement of awareness" is  performed. Once again, depending on the distinctive characteristics of the prac titioners, this practice may be performed "with mental elaborations," "without  mental elaborations," and "completely without mental elaborations." According  to our text, the first is intended for practitioners who are rich and young but lack  in true understanding, the second for those of medium possessions, age, and  wisdom; and the last for those who are impoverished and old but possess great  wisdom.  

The first group tames the engagement of their awareness by actually acting out  the mandala. Together with yogins and yoginis in a number equal to that of the  male and female enlightened beings of their chosen mandala, they withdraw to a  solitary place. There they prepare a mandala, and while occupying the abodes of  the enlightened beings in it, they practice the generation and completion processes  with all the ritual details. The offerings play an instrumental role in the transfor 

mation of the practitioners into enlightened beings. In making ritual offerings,  they practice in the manner of enlightened beings making offerings to enlightened  beings until they actualize this mode of offering.  

In contrast to this training, those who tame the engagement of their awareness  "completely without mental elaborations" perform the practice known as "the  activity of a bhusuku." Bhusuku is a Sanskrit acronym for "eating, sleeping, and  defecating." Apart from these three life-sustaining actions, these practitioners do  nothing but meditate on emptiness. It is by playing on the meaning of the Tibetan  word for "taming the engagement" (brtul-zhugs) that Lce-sgom-pa explains this  practice, which consists of taming (brtul) the ordinary mental processes that in volve conceptual thinking, and infusing (zhugs) all external and internal events  into the mandala of enlightened beings. Here, Lce-sgom-pa applies one of the  classic Buddhist meditative sequences as the guideline for this Tantric meditation.  The practitioners should first see themselves and their world as the celestial man 

dala and the enlightened beings dwelling in it, while maintaining the conventional  temporary nature of that mandala. Second, they realize how that mandala and its  inhabitants came into being through the working of their ordinary minds. Third,  they realize that in actual fact the true mind does not objectify or perceive external  objects (mi dmigs-pa), since the true nature of everything is emptiness. Nonper 

ception of objects brings about a new type of perception, a direct realization of  the true nature of things. The four steps in this meditation endow the four kinds  of offerings - outer, inner, secret, and suchness - with a new meaning.  

These three practices for taming the engagement of the awareness - with, with out, and completely without mental elaborations - enhance the practitioners' sta bility of meditative experience, and lead them to the fourth stage of the postme ditative practice, in which a very stable experience is reached. At this stage the  

practitioners explore the degree to which their meditative experience has been  secured by undertaking the so-called "practice of the crazy yogin." This is a serious  test for their equanimity and impartiality. For example, their experience of having 

336 YAEL BENTOR  

a nice meal should not be the least bit different from eating excrement; drinking  beer from drinking urine, and so forth. They should experience a total equanimity  not only toward undertaking these diametrically opposed activities but also with  regard to abstaining from them. This is a state of complete freedom from duality.  It is no longer a practice of postmeditation, since there is no longer any such  distinction to be made.  

Lce-sgom-pa warns against the misuse of these highest practices - of taming  the engagement of the awareness and the practice of the crazy yogin - by ignorant  persons who do not understand their true purpose. He emphasizes that it is only  for persons endowed with spiritual qualities that these practices can be factors  conducive to enlightenment. Moreover, the subject of the second part of this  chapter, the keeping of the practitioner's vows and commitments on the path,  which is not translated here, also stresses the moral foundations of this practice.  Lce-sgom-pa concludes the present section by reiterating the Tantra/Mantra  method of employing the "enemy" for overcoming that "enemy." Whereas in the  view of the Sutras the enjoyment of the senses is the cause of bondage in samsara,  the Tantra maintains that this very enjoyment is the key to liberation from sam sara. The Tantra, however, makes practitioners' reliance on the enjoyment of the  senses conditional on their thorough understanding of the true nature of sense  objects. Recognizing the essential characteristics of the objects of desire and their  effect on the mind is the foundation of the Great Seal, and the subject of the  seventh chapter of Lce-sgom-pa's Outline of the Jewel Mound of Instructions.  

The work from which our selection is taken, The Outline of the Jewel Mound of  Instructions (Man-ngag-rin-chen-spungs-pa'i-dkar-chag), is based on two sources.  One version was printed by The Pleasure of Elegant Sayings Printing Press at  Sarnath, 1971, and the other, a copy of which was kindly sent to me by Per  Sorensen, is found in the National Library in Bhutan, Inv. no. 282. Passages shown  in {curly brackets} in the text indicate notes added by the hand of an unknown  copyist. Only those notes that do not interfere with the the flow of the text are  included here. This research was supported by The Israel Science Foundation,  founded by The Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities.  

Further Reading  

For a general discussion of the Buddhist Tantra path, see the last chapter of the  fourteenth Dalai Lama's, The World of Tibetan Buddhism, translated by Geshe  Thupten Jinpa (Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1995). Other such discussions are  found in Geshe Kelsang Gyatso, Tantric Grounds and Paths (London: Tharpa Pub 

lications, 1994) and Daniel Cozort, Highest Yoga Tantra (Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion,  1996). On the initiation ritual according to the Kalacakra system see the four teenth Dalai Lama's, The Kalachakra Tantra: Rite of Initiation, translated, edited,  and introduced by Jeffrey Hopkins (London: Wisdom Publications, 1985). For a 

MANTR A PATH : LCE-SGOM-P A 337  

good treatment of Tibetan meditative rituals in general and the generation process  in particular, see Stephan Beyer, The Cult of Tara: Magic and Ritual in Tibet (Berke ley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1973). For a translation of a  Tibetan explanation for both generation and completion, see Jamgon Kongtrul,  

Creation and Completion: Essential Points of Tantric Meditation, translated by Sarah  Harding (Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1996). For a translation of another ex planatory work on the generation process, together with a lengthy introduction,  see Herbert V. Guenther, The Creative Vision (Novato, Cal: Lotsawa, 1987.) Un fortunately this is not easy reading. For a discussion of the generation process  according to the Kalacakra system, see Roger Jackson, "The Kalachakra Genera tion-Stage Sadhana," in The Wheel of Time: The Kalachakra in Context, edited by  Beth Simon (Madison, Wisc: Deer Park Books, 1985), pp. 119-38. On the six  yogas of Naropa, see Herbert V. Guenther, The Life and Teaching of Naropa (Lon don: Oxford University Press, 1963), and Glenn H. Mullin, Readings on the Six  Yogas of Naropa (Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion, 1997). On Lce-sgom-pa, see Per K.  Sorensen, "The Ascetic Lce-sgom Shes-rab Rdo-rje Alias Lce-sgom Zhig-po: Pro lific, Allusive, but Elusive," Journal of the Nepal Research Centre 11 (forthcoming).  

"The Practice of the Mantra Path" by Lce-sgom-pa  

While bowing down with reverence through my three avenues of being [my  body, speech, and mind] to the lama, yi-dam [tutelary deities], and dakinis, I  have written concisely on the theory and practice of the Mantra, the path of  the swift messenger of excellent skillful means.  

Thinking about the inconceivable number of types of sentient beings to be  trained, the completely perfect Buddha taught, on the whole, an inconceivable  diversity of vehicles for the path. But, in fact those vehicles for nirvana are  three. Furthermore, the path that brings attainment of the highest buddhahood  is nothing but the Great Vehicle (Mahayana). The others, the two vehicles of  Hearers and Solitary Buddhas, were taught as skillful means for gradually in 

ducting into the Great Vehicle people of lesser mental capacities. The Sutra of  Great Liberation That Expands in All Directions teaches:  

O sons of noble families, for example, just as one person has three names - when he is young he is called a child, when he is over twenty years old, he  is called a man, and after passing the age of eighty he is called an old per son - just so are the three vehicles of mine. To the Hearers whose minds  are limited I taught the small vehicle, to the Solitary Buddhas whose minds  are moderately expanded I taught the medium vehicle, and to the Bodhi sattvas who have entered the great path, I taught the great vehicle. O son of  noble family, even though there are diverse doors for understanding, even tually, they are united into one juncture. This juncture is the One Vehicle  (Ekayana), which when separated through skillful means is considered to  be three. The vehicles of the Hearers and of Solitary Buddhas are included 

338 YAEL BENTOR  

as well in the Great Vehicle. The Great Vehicle alone is the vehicle for bud dhahood. Therefore, even though there are three vehicles, these are the One  Vehicle.  

Also the Song of the Names of Manjusri (Manjusrinamasangiti) states:  

Realizing the advantages for beings of the methods and ways of the different  vehicles, he [Manjusri] has gone forth from the three vehicles and abides in  the fruit of the one vehicle.  

The Great Vehicle, taking into account the two different types of people who  are receptacles for the practice, but who have not yet reached the path of Seeing,  taught two dissimilar systems for the path. In taking into account those people  who are only slightly afflicted by the desire for sense objects, who have the  ability to renounce, and who aspire to attain awakening, the path of the Per 

fection of Wisdom of the Great Vehicle was taught. In taking into account  those who are greatly afflicted by the desire for sense objects, who are unable  to renounce, and who aspire to awakening, the Mantra path was taught. Also  within the Mantra itself two paths were taught: 1. the path of purifying the  mind in stages by the outer and inner generation process and by the completion  process, and 2. the path of the Great Seal that is the instantaneous practice of  the essential meaning.  

The method of overcoming the afflicting emotions in the Perfection of Wis dom of the Great Vehicle is as follows: Having placed the afflicting emotions  and the objects of desire in the position of an enemy, one overcomes them by  means of an antidote of the opposing type, an antidote that contradicts them.  By meditating on nonattraction as an antidote to desire, on loving kindness as  an antidote to aversion, and on codependent origination as an antidote to ig norance, and so forth, one overcomes them. In the Mantra system of the Great  Vehicle, one overcomes the afflicting emotions of passion through antidotes of  a corresponding type. One meditates on sublime desire as an antidote to or dinary desire. Having transformed the entire vessel-world and its content-in habitants into a celestial mansion-mandala with pure enlightened beings, one  enjoys in the manner of enlightened being making offerings to enlightened  being, of the playfulness of enlightened wisdom in enlightened wisdom, and  of the dissolution of the nature of things into the nature of things. Thereby,  the ordinary afflicting emotions that afflict one's stream of being are cleared  away - in the same way, for example, as one would soothe a burn by fumi gating it in the same fire that caused it - in order that the pain of the burn  quickly subside. The method of overcoming the afflicting emotions in the in stantaneous Great Seal is to recognize their essential characteristics, and  thereby abandon them. By realizing the inherent nature or the essential char acteristics of the conceptualization of the objects of desire and of the afflicting  emotions as the nonarising true nature of reality, the holding of things as real  is reversed. By virtue of this reversal, craving and aversion are naturally lib-

MANTRA PATH: LCE-SGOM-PA 339  

erated. For example, one might mistakenly take a mirage to be a body of water,  but by carefully investigating, seeing that there is no water there, the clinging  to the holding of the mirage as water is naturally liberated. Hence even Tantra  does not teach that the actual afflicting emotions are taken on the path. Al 

though there is some variation in their methods of abandoning the afflicting  emotions, in terms of abandonment itself there is no difference between the  three paths.  

Now, generally speaking the majority of the gods and people of the Desire  Realm, greatly afflicted by desire for objects of the senses, are unable to re nounce, but still aspire to awakening. For them the Buddha taught the method  of training on the path through the special means of the Tantra belonging to  the Great Vehicle (Mahayana). There are two general subjects here: 1. the path  of the initiations that bring maturation and 2. the path of the skillful means  that bring liberation.  

THE PATH OF THE RIPENING INITIATION  

1. The essential nature of the initiation is cleansing the impurities of the  stream of being of the disciple and endowing them with efficacy. 2. The ety mology: It is called "ripening" because it causes the unripe basis to ripen, and  it is called "initiation" because having been made into a receptacle suitable for  meditation on a particular path, one is initiated, empowered for meditation on  that particular path. 3. The divisions of the initiation: In terms of their essential  meanings there are four divisions. The first is the vase initiation, the second  the secret initiation, the third the enlightened wisdom initiation with a consort  (prajna), and the fourth the precious word initiation. There are two divisions  to the vase initiation, the initiation of the disciple and the initiation of the  teacher (vajracarya). In both the secret initiation and the consort initiation  there are two divisions: the initiation of the path of passion [formation] and  the initiation of the path of liberation [dissolution]. There are no divisions in  the fourth initiation. It is the "leaping over" or the culmination of all four  initiations. There are three divisions in terms of the degree of elaboration:  {Those who are wealthy and who like mental elaboration} are conferred elab orate initiation by means of a mandala of powdered precious substances, grain,  or colored powder. {Those with medium wealth and understanding) are given  a medium initiation by means of a body mandala, or a mandal of a bouquet of  flowers. Those who posses little wealth and do not like mental elaboration are  conferred the four initiations in an abbreviated form by means of the body,  speech, and mind of the lama, or an emblem, or some small article of initiation.  

4. The internal grades of the initiation are four in number: The cycle of the  Action Tantra (Kriya Tantra) teaches that the initiation is conferred with the  water of the vase using only a mandal. Its initiand becomes a vessel suitable  for meditation on the enlightened being by merely bestowing permission for  the mantra. The cycle of Performance Tantra (Carya Tantra) teaches that 

340 YAEL BENTO R  

through the five initiations of knowledge and the initiation of vajra practice,  six initiations in all, the initiand becomes a suitable vessel. The Yoga Tantra  explains that through the complete initiation, beginning with the five initia tions of knowledge and followed by the initiation of the disciple and the ini tiation of the teacher, the initiand becomes a suitable vessel. The Highest Yoga  Tantra (Anuttara Yoga Tantra) explains that through the complete vase initi ation as well as the three supreme initiations the initiand becomes a vessel  suitable for meditation on the entire path of the generation process and com pletion process.  

5. This being so, there are three benefits or purposes for conferring the four  initiations: The first benefit or purpose is purifying the basis from aspects of  impurity. First, the vase initiation mainly purifies the impurity of the bad ha bitual tendencies of the body. Second, the secret initiation mainly purifies the  impurities of speech. Third, the initiation of enlightened wisdom with a consort  mainly purifies the impurities of the mind. Fourth, the precious word initiation  purifies every impurity of the body, speech, and mind - all three. The second  benefit or purpose is making the initiand a vessel suitable for meditation on  the four paths. The vase initiation makes the initiand a vessel suitable for  meditation on the generation process of oneself as an enlightened being. The  secret initiation makes the initiand a vessel suitable for meditation in which  one's own body possesses skillful means, such as the "channels and winds" [the  subtle body]. The initiation of enlightened wisdom with a consort makes the  initiand a vessel suitable for meditation on the bliss that relies on the consort,  the body of another. The fourth initiation makes the initiand a vessel suitable  for meditation on the instantaneous Great Seal. The third purpose of conferring  the four initiations is to bring the initiand into the fortunate state of attaining  the four embodiments of the fruit. The giving of the vase initiation brings the  initiand into the fortunate state of attaining the emanation body of the fruit.  Similarly, the secret initiation brings the initiand into the fortunate state of  attaining the embodiment of enjoyment. The initiation of enlightened wisdom  with a consort leads to the Dharma embodiment, and the fourth initiation to  the embodiment of the essential nature. In short, initiation brings the initiand  into the fortunate state of attaining all the good qualities and accomplishments,  both mundane and supermundane.  

According to the system of Lama Naropa, there are three general topics on  the path of the skillful means that bring liberation: the yoga of the path; the  conducive practices; and the companion vows. The yoga of the path is divided  into two practices, the generation process and the completion process.  

In the generation process there are five topics.  

1. The essential nature: One should generate that which is to be generated - whatever enlightened being one chooses with the appropriate components of  the skillful method.  

2. There are two kinds of divisions: The divisions appropriate to different  texts are two: the generation process for attaining the common accomplish-

MANTR A PATH : LCE-SGOM-P A 341  

ments according to manuals of ritual collections, and the generation process  for attaining the supreme accomplishment. For these divisions one needs to  consider each individual text. The divisions according to the degree of elabo ration are three: extensive meditation on the wheel of the mandala; middle  meditation; and concise meditation on the main ornament of the male heroic  being or of the female heroic being.  

3. The etymology: Because this is a process of visualizing the generation of  the supporting celestial mansion [the mandala] and the supported enlightened  beings [residing in it], it is called "generation process."  

4. The methods of meditation are of two types: Those who pursue the pro found and are not fond of the elaborate generate the complete visualization  in an instant. Then in clarifying the visualization in stages, they meditate.  And those who pursue the extensive and are fond of the elaborate, meditate  in stages on the proceedings of the practice. Clarifying the visualization in  stages for as long as they are not weary, they meditate. The method of medi tation for each of these should be known from the practice manual of each  meditation.  

5. There are four purposes: The purpose of purifying ordinary conceptual  thoughts; the purpose of the actual arising of the concentration of tranquil  abiding and the spontaneous arising of penetrative insight; the purpose of pre paring a basis for the completion process; and the purpose of attaining the  perfect form-body of the fruit.  

In the generation process [in the cycles] up to Yoga Tantra - apart from  merely sealing with the four seals, meditating on the body of the enlightened  beings as illusion, gathering back in stages the enlightened being and its ce lestial mansion at the end of the meditative session, and meditating on emp tiness - there is no completion process with its distinctive methods. Above and  beyond the generation process, Highest Yoga Tantra also teaches the comple tion process.  

In the completion process there are also five topics.  

1. The essential nature of the completion process is the actual generation of  the enlightened wisdom of bliss, clarity, and nonconceptual thought in the  body and mind by setting the mind on certain supports.  

2. There are three divisions according to the system of Lama Naropa. a. The  "natural state of the basic entity": First, the natural state of the basic entity of  the body is the natural condition of the bodily channels, the winds and the  pure elements of bodhicitta [thought of enlightenment]. By knowing all these  conditions exactly, one knows the crucial points of the meditation. Second, the  natural state of the basic entity of the mind: The actual natural condition of  the mind as such is great bliss, primordially empty, devoid of inherent essence,  lacking mental elaborations. By realizing well this natural condition, one knows  the essential nature of the meaning off which to meditate. By realizing these  two aspects of the natural state of the basic entity in this way, one knows the  meaning on which to meditate, and the crucial points of the meditation. b. The 

342 YAEL BENTOR  

"natural state of the path": Knowing the basic entity in this way leads to the  teachings on the natural state of the path. There are three practices here de pending on the stream of being of the practitioner: the practice of one's own  body as possessing the means; the practice, with a consort (the body of another);  and the practice of nondual Great Seal. The practice that relies on one's own  body as the means is known as the "six dharmas" in the system of Lama Naropa.  c. The "natural state of the fruit": Practicing these leads to the "process of arising  of the natural state of the fruit" within one's stream of being. This is "arising  in the mode of the four kinds of the yoga of experiencing the true condition":  the yoga of one-pointedness, the yoga free of mental elaborations, the yoga of  the multitude as one taste, and the yoga of the stream of the innate nature  without meditation. These too arise gradually, instantaneously, or in leaping  over, depending on the special faculties of the person who is the receptacle for  the practice. For the meaning of these you should examine the Great Guidance  of the Path.  

3. The etymology: Because one perfectly completes enlightened wisdom it is  called "completion process."  

4. You should know the practice of meditative techniques from the trans mission.  

5. There are four purposes for the completion process: a. The purpose of  abandoning clinging to the enlightened being of the generation process, while  realizing this enlightened being as the true nature of things; b. The purpose of  directly realizing the natural innate enlightened wisdom and great bliss; this  purpose is fulfilled by relying on the special method whereby the meditative  experience that dissolves and increases the pure elements takes the practition ers through the rebirth process by means of bliss, clarity, and nonconceptuality.  In relying on the special method, the meditative experience that dissolves and  increases the pure elements takes the practitioners through the rebirth pro 

cesses by means of bliss, clarity, and nonconceptuality, whereupon they realize  directly the natural coemergent enlightened wisdom and great bliss, c. The  purpose of purifying all the cognitive obscurations, d. The purpose of coming  to attain the dharma embodiment of the final fruit.  

Now, the teachings on the conducive practices.  

1. The essential nature of these practices: Having been absorbed in a con centration within meditative equipoise, one practices preserving the experi ences of meditative equipoise in the postmeditation phase by combining it with  various daily activities.  

2. The practice is divided into two parts: a. First is the "practice-without passion," which is subdivided into two parts. The lesser practice is the practice  of the Hearers and the Solitary Buddhas: after abandoning completely all the  objects of the senses, they undertake practices that cause bodily hardship and  weariness, such as the twelve ascetic practices. The extensive practice is the  practice of the Bodhisattva: after abandoning the objects of the senses, theyMANTR A PATH : LCE-SGOM-P A 343  

practice the ten perfections for the sake of others, b. The "practice-with-pas sion" is the practice of the Mantra. By means of thoroughly knowing the true  nature of all appearances, they train in the path while relying on the five objects  of the senses. The Guhyasamaja says: "The enlightened wisdom with passion  always relies on objects of the senses with desire." In classifying that practice  of the Mantra there are four stages: beginners' practice; the practice of those  in whom slight experience has arisen; the practice of attaining a slight stability  in the experience; and the practice of attaining a great stability in experience.  3. The methods of the practice:  

a. Beginners' practice: Beginners chiefly engage in practice between medi tative sessions - in the recitation of mantras, food yoga, tormas, mandals, the  seven-limbed practice, water offerings, tsha-tshas, circumambulations, recita tion of sutras, listening and explaining the teaching, realizing the view of the  teaching, writing the letters of the scriptures, and so forth, with great devotion.  They perform the complete practice, including the preparation, main part, and  conclusion. By mainly performing these practices, beginners perfect the accu mulations and purify the obscurations, thereby developing the factors condu cive to the arising of experience in the mind. These are called the practices of  Samantabhadra.  

b. The practice at the time of the arising of a slight inner experience, as a  result of that beginner's practice: The practitioners unify the slight inner ex perience that arises in their meditative equipoise with their postmeditation,  and combine it with everything that appears to their sense faculties. Further,  just as in the meditative equipoise of the generation process they meditate on  the mandala of the enlightened beings of their yi-dam, so too in postmeditation,  they should meditate on and see all appearances as the illusory mandala of the  enlightened beings. They also should combine the experience as it is generated  in the meditative equipoise of the completion process with everything that  appears to themselves in postmeditation, and unify them. In short, when the  practitioners arise from their meditative equipoise and engage in the manifold  external world, enjoying forms, sounds, scents, tastes, and objects of touch,  they then know all these to be of the inherent nature of the enlightened beings.  Further, {since they know them as) their own {mind}, and they know the true  nature of their mind as emptiness, they practice in the manner {of enlightened  beings making offerings to enlightened beings, in the playfulness of enlightened  wisdom in enlightened wisdom} and in the dissolution of the nature of things  into the nature of things. Hence, everything that appears to their faculties in  the postmeditation phase assists them on their path. This is called the secret  practice as well as the practice of realization. They should rely on these ritual  actions between the meditative sessions described above - actions that are ben eficial to their meditative experience and do not harm it, and avoid any harm  to their meditative experience.  

c. Performing in this manner brings about the practice at the time of attaining  a slight stability in the experience. For the sake of enhancing that experience, 

344 YAE L BENTO R  

they should practice taming the engagement of their awareness. For this there  are three practices.  

i. The practice with mental elaborations: Those persons who are receptacles  for the practice that possess great riches are young in age, and small in wisdom  perform in the following manner. In a very secluded place that is in harmony  with their mind, they arrange perfect requisites for the feast offering. In an  upper chamber they arrange a mandala, receptacles and offerings decorated  with various ornaments, and prepare there a seat for the yogins and yoginis.  They gather consorts, endowed with the essential characteristics, in a number  equal to that of the female enlightened beings of the mandala. Then the yogins  and yoginis enter into the abodes of the heroes and heroines in the mandala.  They meditate as in the generation and completion processes, beginning with  the meditation on the protection wheel. Next, the yogins and yoginis make  offerings, first outer offerings {such as flowers and incense), then inner offer ings (for the five senses), then secret offerings, and finally, they make offerings  of songs and dances again and again. At that time, they entirely abandon or dinary craving in every respect. They make offerings in the manner of enlight 

ened beings making offerings to enlightened beings, the playfulness of enlight ened wisdom in enlightened wisdom, and of the dissolution of the nature of  things into the nature of things. In this way, they practice uninterruptedly for  six months or more. This is the practice with mental elaborations.  

ii. Second, the practice without mental elaborations: Persons who are re ceptacles for the practice with medium riches, age, and wisdom perform ev erything as above except that they perform the entire practice in a medium  way together with one, two, or three consorts, who are endowed with the  essential characteristics.  

iii. Third, the practice completely without mental elaborations: Persons who  are receptacles for the practice with few riches, old age, and great wisdom  perform in the following manner. In an isolated place, such as a site for the  disposal of the dead, having renounced the actual consort, they engage in med 

itative equipoise on the natural innate enlightened wisdom. They perform the  activity of a bhusuku. Here bhu stands for bhunj - the activity of eating; su for  sutana [svapana] - sleeping; and ku for kutisara [kutisara] - defecating. In  such a manner they are not active: abandoning all but these three involuntary  activities, they preserve only the yoga of emptiness. Now, you may ask why  these are called "taming the engagement of awareness." Thoroughly compre 

hending the outer, inner, secret, and suchness, they discipline their ordinary  conceptual thoughts by means of their awareness. Thereby all the outer and  inner phenomena are infused into the assemblage of enlightened beings of the  mandala as mere conventional illusion. They then further realize that all these  enlightened beings are emanations of their own minds. In the highest truth,  they do not perceive them even as mind itself: rather, they penetrate the equa 

nimity of emptiness. Hence this is called the practice of taming the engagement  of awareness. 

MANTR A PATH : LCE-SGOM-P A 345  

d. Practicing in this way brings about attainment of great stability in expe rience and realization: At this stage, through the practice of taming the en gagement of awareness great stability and some ability in the three doors are  attained. For the sake of examining whether these experiences and realizations  are stable or unstable, one should perform the "practice of the crazy yogin."  There is pure food that should be eaten and food that should not be eaten  {such as excrement), drinks to be drunk {such as beer} and drinks not to be  drunk {such as urine}, places to be gone to {such as the king's palace), places  not to be gone to {such as the house of a butcher), those to have intercourse  with {such as a consort with the essential characteristics) and those not to have  intercourse with {such as mother and sister). When they practice all these  things that are to be done and not to be done, they practice with impartiality;  and when they give them up, they give them up with impartiality. They practice  such a practice at the appropriate time regardless of hope and fear even with  regard to whatever is dharma and not dharma, without affirming or negating,  and without accepting or rejecting anything. Hence, when they simply abide  unceasingly in the actuality of the realization of the equanimity of samsara and  nirvana, free of dualistic grasping, without meditation and postmeditation, that  is called "practicing the great meditative equipoise." It was taught that the  culmination of that experience gives rise to the path of seeing.  

4. The etymology of practice: because the practitioner ought to perform it,  it is called "practice."  

5. Abandoning the faults of objections: Clearing doubts about contradictions  within the scriptures. Now the scriptures of the Perfection of Wisdom teach  for the most part that enjoying the five objects of the senses is the cause of  bondage to samsara. Yet many Tantras of the Great Yoga of the Mantra teach  that enjoying anything one likes among the five objects of the senses is the  cause for liberation. If you ask, "would not this contradiction cause doubt?"  the answer is that these two scriptures are intended for different persons.  Who are they? In taking into account those people who are receptacles for the  practice, who are ignorant, who do not understand the inherent nature of the  five objects of the senses: on that basis, relying on objects of the senses was  taught as a cause of bondage. And in taking into account those people who are  receptacles for the practice, who have the wisdom of completely understanding  the inherent nature of the five objects of the senses: on that basis, relying on  anything they like among the five objects of the senses was taught as a cause  for liberation. The Guhyasamaja teaches: "In relying on desire toward all de sirous enjoyments, the yogin would quickly attain buddhahood." The Jewel  Peak Sutra (Arya Ratndkuta) teaches: "Kasyapa, it is like this. Just as, for ex ample, a poison enclosed by mantra and medicinal herbs cannot perform the  action of killing, O Kasyapa, so too afflicting emotions enclosed by wisdom  and skillful means cannot perform the action of wrongdoing." The same source  also states: "Endowed with great means, afflicting emotions become a factor of  enlightenment." 

346 YAEL BENTO R  

6. The benefit of training in the Mantra path: By enjoying anything they like  while understanding the inherent nature of the five objects of the senses as the  cause, they would attain the untainted bliss of the fruit. The Guhyasamaja says:  "Though they adhere to intense vows of asceticism, they will not achieve, but  when they adhere to all enjoyments of desire, they will quickly achieve." The  Cakrasamvara says: "Therefore by means of bliss you will attain blissfulness,  all-awakening." Therefore all the previous buddhas and bodhisattvas also at 

tained the fruit by adhering to the Mantra practice. The Guhyasamaja teaches:  "Buddhas and bodhisattvas and those who practice the highest Mantra practice  attain the unwavering [eighth bodhisattva level], the highest quality, by relying  on all desires." If those Mantra practices are not performed in accordance with  the timing of the practice, if the beginner performs the taming of engagement  of awareness or the "practice of the crazy yogin," that will later become a cause  for a lower rebirth. Therefore it is very important to perform in accordance  with the timing of the practice. In this way these four practices are conducive  to quick awakening. For example, when you urge a good horse on with the  conducive factor of a whip, it runs faster. Just so, you should obliterate your  ordinary body, speech, and mind with the conducive factor of practicing the  experience and realization in meditative equipoise. Thereby you quickly bring  about the attainment of the level of buddhahood. Therefore this is called the  conducive practice. 
