+++
title = "21 Tantric Buddhism and Chinese Thoughtin East Asia"

+++

Fabio Rambelli  

The text translated below from the Chinese, entitled Ritual of the Secret Dharanis  of the Three Siddhis for the Destruction of Hell, the Transformation of Karmic Hin drances, and the Liberation from the Three Conditioned Worlds (hereafter, Ritual), is  a short but comprehensive summary of the doctrines and meditative practices of  East Asian esoteric Buddhism. The ideas and practices presented in this text cir culated in various forms in China between the late Tang and the early Song  periods (ninth and tenth centuries), and became very influential in Japan from  the twelfth century onward. The earliest known surviving versions were edited in  Japan in the early nineteenth century.  

The origin of the Ritual is obscure: no official Chinese catalogues of Buddhist  texts of the Tang period mentions it, and its title does not appear in any Japanese  records until the late ninth century. Direct citations from the text appear only in  much later works, composed in Japan between the eleventh and the twelfth cen 

turies, particularly those by the Shingon monk Kakuban (1095-1143) and the  Zen monk Yosai (1141-1215). Under its title the Ritual includes the note "trans lated at the imperial behest by Subhakarasimha Tripitaka from Central India,"  but this attribution is dubious. Subhakarasimha (Shanwuwei, in Chinese: 637- 735), traditionally considered to be the founder of the Tantric Buddhist tradition  in China, did translate several Tantric works, among them the Mahavairocana  Sutra, but it seems unlikely that he was involved in the production of this text.  One of the main reasons for which the traditional attribution to Subhakarasimha  has been questioned is the content of the Ritual. It contains an advanced com bination of Indian Tantric teachings and practices and Chinese doctrines and  rituals, mainly drawn from medicine (especially from such texts as the Huang-di  nei jing su wen) and Daoism. Not only is the Ritual obviously not a translation  from the Sanskrit but the first Tantric patriarch in China could not possibly have  been responsible for such an advanced form of religious and cultural syncretism. 

362 FABI O RAMBELL I  

Scholars have therefore moved the Ritual's probable date of composition to the  late Tang period (first half of the ninth century). The reference to Subhakarasimha,  however, is not completely arbitrary. The Ritual is in fact heavily influenced by  the susiddhi ("perfect siddhi" or perfect spiritual attainment) textual lineage cen 

tered on the Susiddhikara Sutra, translated into Chinese by the Tantric patriarch.  This textual tradition was popular in China during the late Tang period and  became very influential in Japan, especially in the Tendai school of esoteric Bud dhism. Recently, it has been suggested that this text may actually have been  composed in Japan.  

Apart from Chinese medical and Daoist elements, the body of the Ritual consists  of citations from Tantric texts. Its patchwork-like nature makes this text particu larly interesting as a summary of late Tang Tantric doctrines and practices, which  later became the template of Japanese esoteric Buddhism and also influenced such  aspects of cultural life in medieval Japan as music, linguistics, poetry. The con fluence of Tantric Buddhism and Daoism in the Ritual, with its systematic cor relation of Indian doctrines and practices with doctrines and practices from the  Chinese tradition, offers historians of religion an example of cultural interaction.  This text also shows the dynamism of the Tantric tradition which, despite its  marginal origins, nevertheless became one of the central cultural formations in  several regions of the East Asian world.  

The main protagonists of the Ritual are the five buddhas located on the lotus  flower at the center of the Womb mandala and, in various combinations, also in  the Vajra mandala (see below). Each represents or embodies some characteristics  of the soteriological processes at play in Tantric Buddhism, especially the steps  leading to enlightenment and the five types of wisdom acquired through it. Ma 

havairocana, the cosmic buddha of East Asian Tantric Buddhism, is the most  important among them. Situated at the center of the mandala (see below), he  represents both the principle of enlightenment and the whole range of powers  associated with it. All around him are the so-called four buddhas. Below him, to  the east, is Aksobhya, to the south is Ratnasambhava, to the west is Amitabha,  and to the north is Amoghasiddhi. These buddhas are usually referred to in the  text with the honorific title of "tathagata," meaning "the one who came to this  world form the realm of truth" or "the one who came to this world in the same  way as the buddhas of the past." The five buddhas serve as the reference point  for a number of five-elements cosmic series that structure the Tantric universe  and guide the practitioners in their meditations.  

As we will see, the practices described in the text enable the practitioners to  identify themselves with Mahavairocana, the paradigmatic buddha of esoteric  Buddhism. The text makes several references to the doctrines concerning the  nature and characteristics of the buddha. For example, "Buddha body" refers to  the buddha's superhuman body, characterized by thirty-two major signs and  eighty-eight lesser marks (even though the text also calls a Buddha body the body  of the practitioner who has successfully completed the cycle of meditations it  describes); "Buddha land" is the paradisiacal pure land ruled by a perfected bud-TANTR1C BUDDHISM , CHINES E THOUGH T 363  

dha who preaches the Law and leads beings to salvation; and the "Buddha assem bly" is a synonym for mandala.  

A mandala is a Tantric representation of the Dharmadhatu, the enlightened  universe. In this image, the most representative buddhas, bodhisattvas, and other  beings are ordered according to a geometrical pattern. Although a mandala is  usually painted, three-dimensional mandalas also exist. East Asian esoteric Bud 

dhism acknowledges two paradigmatic forms of mandala, respectively the Womb  mandala and the Vajra mandala. The Womb mandala uses the imagery of womb  and fetus to represent both the compassionate soteriological activity of the Buddha  that permeates the entire universe and the principle of universal salvation. In  contrast, the Vajra mandala represents the absolute wisdom attained by the prac 

titioner with enlightenment, symbolized by the vajra ("diamond" or "thunder bolt"). Both mandalas are divided into "sections" centered on a specific buddha  or bodhisattva who represents various aspects of the enlightened cosmos. In this  text, as in most esoteric Buddhist materials in East Asia, the term vajra is often  used without direct reference to the Vajra mandala and its related doctrines, but  simply as a marker of Tantric discourse to signify something noble, superior,  particularly powerful, and efficacious for salvation. In these cases, vajra is trans lated in the text below as "adamantine."  

As mentioned before, the five buddhas are located on the eight-petaled lotus  at the center of the Womb mandala. The lotus is a very important metaphor in  Buddhism; the fact that the lotus has its roots in the mud of putrid ponds but  develops into a beautiful and pure white flower was primarily used to represent  the process of enlightenment. The lotus was later associated with the human heart  (hrdaya) - the bodily location of the mind (citta) and the physical site at which  enlightenment takes place. Indian and Chinese physicians noted a morphological  resemblance of the lotus to the heart. As the Ritual says, "the shape of the heart  of ordinary people is like a closed lotus. .. . In visualization one should open  one's heart to form a white lotus with eight petals." Enlightenment results from  opening one's heart by means of meditative practices, to reveal within it the shape  of the eight-petaled lotus found at the center of the mandala. As a support for  meditation, the practitioner uses a white disk representing both the moon as a  metaphor for the eight-petaled lotus (which is painted in an almost circular way)  and the heart of the practitioner himself, as well as the pure enlightened mind  achieved through such practice. Thus, through visualization the ascetic modifies  his body/mind to embody enlightenment. In this practice, soteriology merges with  physiology: indeed, bodily metaphors of the heart became an important part of  the doctrines of bodhicitta, literally "the mind (citta) of enlightenment (bodhi)."  This key concept refers first of all to the "thought of enlightenment," that is, the  desire to be saved and to engage in Buddhist practice. This is the very beginning  of the individual process of salvation, and therefore it is a very important moment.  In East Asia, however, bodhicitta is often interpreted literally as "the mind of  enlightenment." In this context, one can-arouse the desire of enlightenment be cause all sentient beings have an innate principle of enlightenment. In other 

364 FABI O RAMBELL I  

words, we are "always already" enlightened, but we just don't know it. Practice  thus becomes a process toward the self-awareness of one's innate buddhahood.  Tantric Buddhism added a further important layer of meaning: in a coherent  nondualistic fashion it stressed that if everyone is innately enlightened, then the  initial desire for enlightenment (bodhicitta) is already the final goal of practice.  This move enabled Tantric Buddhism to emphasize the possibility of attaining  salvation in the present life - or, as the well-known Japanese definition has it, to  "become buddha in this very body."  

The eight-petaled lotus at the center of mandala, where the five buddhas and  their retinue are located, is often described in Tantric literature (and in this text)  as the Dharmadhatu Palace, the cosmic palace where the buddha Mahavairocana,  surrounded by the other buddhas, bodhisattvas, and all kinds of beings, meditates  and preaches. Dharmadhatu, literally "Dharma element," refers to the absolute  reality experienced in enlightenment (the realm of absolute truth, translated in  Chinese as "the realm of Dharma"). Dharma refers primarily to the Buddhist  teachings, but also to the underlying cosmic principles (the absolute Truth) that  the Buddha explained; it also refers, when translated as a noncapitalized and often  plural term (dharmas), to the constituent elements of reality ("things" or "entities"  in general, ranging from material objects to thoughts, mental factors, immaterial  relations, and spiritual entities such as nirvana). Because of the complex meaning  of the term dharma, and because all beings in the universe possess, as we have  already noted, the Buddha nature (the innate principle of buddhahood), the term  "realm of Dharma" came to be used in Chinese and Japanese texts to refer to the  totality of the cosmos as sharing an underlying common principle and/or material  substance. This was one of the major innovations of East Asian Buddhism, prob ably mediated from Chinese cosmological and philosophical doctrines. Once the  universe was envisioned as sharing an underlying substance and principles, it  became possible to speak of Mahavairocana's "Dharmadhatu body," constituted  by the six elements of reality (earth, water, fire, wind, space, and consciousness).  Thus, the entire universe came to be understood as the body of the primary  Tantric Buddha, and ascetics could then seek to reproduce such a cosmic body  within themselves through the performance of Tantric practices such as those  described in the Ritual.  

In this sense, Dharmadhatu-body is a synonym of another complex term,  "Dharmakaya." Literally "the body of absolute truth," it originally referred to what  was left behind in this world by the historical Buddha (Gautama Sakyamuni) after  his extinction: teachings, later preserved as written texts, relics, and traces of  various kinds. This notion of a "body of truth" later appears in the doctrines on  the nature and status of the Buddha body, as paradoxically referring to the tran 

scendental, unconditioned aspects of the Buddha. Mahayana Buddhism devel oped the doctrine of three bodies of the Buddha, according to which Buddha  exists and manifests himself according to three different modalities: Dharmakaya,  Sambhogakaya, and Nirmanakaya. The latter two bodies have forms. The Sambho gakaya (Enjoyment body) is the Buddha body that the ascetic sees as a reward 

TANTRI C BUDDHISM , CHINES E THOUGH T 365  

for his countless practices; it transcends the perceptive and mental faculties of  common, deluded people and can be perceived only by bodhisattvas. The Nir manakaya (Manifestation body) is the physical body in which the Buddha appears  in this world to beings of lesser faculties such as gods, humans, and animals. It  is but a shadow of the splendor of Sambhogakaya, but it is the only way to lead  ignorant beings to salvation. The Dharmakaya is absolute, unconditioned, and  formless. It cannot be perceived or known, but is postulated as the substratum  of all activities of the buddhas. Tantric Buddhism further distinguishes between  the Dharmakaya of Principle and Dharmakaya of Wisdom, a distinction that re 

flects the cosmological and soteriological implications of absolute truth (the prin ciple) and knowledge (wisdom).  

An important contribution of East Asian Tantric Buddhism to the doctrine of  the Buddha bodies, brought about especially by certain Shingon lineages in Japan,  is a change in the status of the Dharmakaya from a formless and signless entity  to an immanent cosmic repository of all possible forms and signs. According to  this vision, the entire universe (the Dharmadhatu) as the "body" of Mahavairocana  (Dharmadhatu-body or Dharmakaya) is an immense semiotic machine, a sort of  pansemiotic cosmos, continuously and eternally engaged in preaching the Law to  all beings and, ultimately, to itself for the sheer pleasure of listening to it. The  Ritual was one of the key texts for such a development. Thus, Buddhism changed  from a doctrine of renunciation into a performance affecting all senses and in volving the entire universe. The status of salvation was modified by this change,  as is shown by the Ritual, in which complex meditative and ritual practices leading  to salvation have the status of multimedia performances, as it were, involving  sounds, visions, lighting effects, the aroma of incense, and architectural setting.  

The Ritual is essentially a set of instructions regarding three short mantras and  related formulae; as such, the text is characterized by the intermingling of the  language of commentary and the language of ritual. It outlines the conceptual  background and describes the ritual procedures that may enable one to afford the  ultimate soteriological goal of esoteric Buddhism, namely to identify oneself with  the buddha Mahavairocana. The structure of the Ritual is as follows: first, the  Tantric-Daoist cosmology of the human body is presented, with all the complex  correlations governing it and the practices necessary to maintain balance. Then,  the three siddhis (spiritual attainments) and the respective mantras are intro duced. The text then describes the production of the "living-body relic" - the  meditative destruction of the ascetic's ordinary body and the creation of a stupa 

like cosmic body. As the text puts it, "From the letter A comes out the syllable  ra, which burns one's body and reduces it to ashes. From the ashes the syllable  va is generated. . . . From it . . . the mantra of the five elements [of the cosmic  stupa] is produced. This mantra takes its place on the five parts of the body. . . .  This is the pure bodhicitta." The visualizations proceed to ensure the embodiment  of both Womb and Vajra mandalas. The Ritual finally concludes with a vast cosmic  vision of absolute nondualism. In a way,the text reproduces the meditative pro 

cess and its results. 

366 FABI O RAMBELL I  

The practices here described consist mainly in visualizing the universe as a five element stupa, also called caitya in the text. The stupa in India is a funerary  monument, sometime of large dimensions, that enshrines relics of the Buddha. It  symbolizes the formless body of the Buddha and the essential structure of the  cosmos. East Asian stupas are usually wooden towers, known in English as pa godas, which enshrine relics or other sacred objects. The stupa described in this  text, however, is a vertical object in the form of a pagoda composed of five ele ments (from bottom to top: square, triangle, circle, crescent, and sphere), used  as a meditation support. The type of stupa described in the text is still used in  Japanese cemeteries as a small memorial monument. Through the meditations  presented in the Ritual, the ascetic will reconfigure his body as a stupa, the mys tical body of Mahavairocana, and thereby become a buddha himself.  

Such a goal is achieved through complex visualizations, based on multiple  interrelations of several subtle substances (breath, light, sound, writing, and so  on), in which the hidden structure of the entire universe is recreated and em bodied by the ascetic through meditation on his body. The universe of the Ritual  is organized on interconnected series of five elements that form closed causal  chains. For example, the text correlates the five buddhas, the five stages of the  enlightenment process, and the five wisdoms thereby attained, with the cosmic  elements (earth, water, fire, wind, and space), the five directions, the five seasons  (the four usual seasons plus an intercalary period), the five aggregates (the skan 

dhas, the psycho-physical constituents of reality), the five viscera, the five souls,  the five phases (wuxing in Chinese: the five natural elements according to the  Chinese cosmology, namely, earth, fire, water, wood, and metal), and so forth.  The body is the privileged site for the experience of such a cosmic structure. Once  mastered and embodied through initiation, knowledge, and ritual action, cos 

mology opens the way to liberation. Such a recursive cosmology is directly re flected in soteriology, as we will see below.  

There are essentially two sets of meditations on the body. Whereas one set  focuses on the internal structure as envisioned by Chinese medicine (the five  viscera), the other set consists in the visualization of three external areas of the  body, which are the sites of the "three siddhis" mentioned in the title of the text.  Siddhi, meaning "achievement, completion," refers here to different kinds of spir 

itual attainment and enlightenment. The three siddhis are: the "intruding siddhi,"  centered in the abdomen; the "protruding siddhi," centered in the heart; and the  "perfect siddhi," centered in the top of the head (usnisd), the location of supreme  wisdom. Each of these is related to a specific mantra, a formula used as a medi 

tation support in which are condensed the spiritual powers of the deity it rep resents. These mantras are, respectively, a ra pa ca na; a vi ra hum kham; and a  vam ram ham kham. By focusing intensely on a mantra's written forms, sounds,  and meanings, the practitioner is able to embody and control the mantra's deity.  

The sites of the three siddhis in the body correspond to the locations of the  three "cinnabar fields" (dantian) in Daoism. According to Daoist medical soteri ology, control of these three centers of pure energy enables the practitioner to 

TANTRI C BUDDHISM , CHINES E THOUGH T 367  

achieve liberation from the coarse body and become an "Immortal" (xianren). The  impact of Daoist soteriology and, more generally speaking, of Chinese cosmic  anthropology, is evident in the Ritual, in which the correlations uniting human  body and external reality are discussed in detail. By becoming aware of the pro 

found relation between the individual and the universe, the initiate is able to  control the cosmic forces and, as a consequence, to embody the cosmos - which,  as we have seen, is actually a stupa, a reliquary body. It should be noted that the  soteriological transformation of the practitioner's body into a Buddha body is  described in the text as an effect of an "empowerment" (adhisthana in Sanskrit,  jiachi in Chinese, kaji in Japanese) that results from the ascetic's interaction with  the Buddha.  

Besides describing the procedures for salvation, the text also mentions the  benefits gained through ritual manipulation of the three mantras that constitute  its nucleus: wealth, health, and longevity for the practitioner; peace and strong  political authority for the country. These are typical Tantric benefits: support of  state and imperial power; worldly benefits; and individual salvation in the present  life. Protection, in particular, is ensured by the activity of Dharma-protectors,  supernatural figures whom the ascetic is able to control through the correct per formance of ritual.  

Descriptions of visualizations, in which several semiotic substances are manip ulated in complex ways in order to effect a transformation of the practitioner's  body and universe, occupy the major part of the text. However, these meditations  are not an end in themselves. The text is not only concerned with individual  spiritual experience but also presents a complex picture of the relationships link ing religious knowledge and practices to other fields of social and cultural life, in  particular cosmology, epistemology, semiotics, soteriology, and politics and state  ideology. We now discuss briefly each of these fields as they are treated in the  texts.  

The Ritual combines Tantric Buddhist ideas and practices with a vocabulary  and a repertoire of images, metaphors, and procedures borrowed from Daoism  and Chinese culture in general in order to provide a more concrete, bodily de scription of the processes that lead one to become a buddha. It is interesting to  note that the Buddha is characterized in these texts as a sort of Daoist immortal,  endowed with a perfect body that is a condensation of the entire universe. In  particular, the Ritual presents breathing techniques of Daoist origin aimed at har monizing the various forms of breath-energy (qi) inside the body. In addition,  visualization of bodily organs and mental apparatus and their relations transforms  the body (or rather, the body-mind complex) into a replica of the cosmos.  

According to both Indian Tantra and traditional Chinese medicine, the human  body is a microcosm. The Ritual privileges the Chinese vision of the body as the  locus for enlightenment. The central apparatus of the body, the five viscera (liver,  lungs, heart, kidneys, and spleen), is directly related to the five phases (wood,  metal, fire, water, earth) in the external world. The five viscera also control five  souls or spiritual functions of the human organism, namely, the celestial soul 

368 FABI O RAMBELLI  

(hun, in Chinese), the terrestrial soul (po), the superior soul (shen), the will (shi),  and the ideas (yi), which are produced by different configurations of the qi (cosmic  breath/energy). Another important network of organs in the body, mentioned  only in passing in the text, is constituted by the six receptacles (liuju, in Chinese).  Whereas the five viscera are basically repositories of breath/energy, the six recep 

tacles function as centers of consumption.  

Based as it is on the manipulation of images, signs, and ritual objects, the bodily  and mental soteriological process described in the text is primarily semiotic, cul minating in the production of a perfect body, a "living-body relic" which, as we  have seen, is a condensation of the entire universe. It is possible that the teachings  in the Ritual and other cognate texts were connected with East Asian practices of  self-mummification, by which ascetics sought to achieve a Buddha body in the  present lifetime. These ascetics, called sokushinbutsu ("buddhas in their present  body") in Japanese, aimed to turn their body into the ultimate stupa-like, whole body relic.  

The meditative technology described in the text implies a particular kind of  semiotics, in which there is no distinction between the practitioner, the signs and  symbolic objects he employs, their meanings, and the external reality (the deities  of the mandala and, ultimately, the entire Dharmadhatu) to which they refer. The  characteristic circularity of esoteric Buddhist practices is particularly apparent in  the text: the tool of meditation (the moon-disk mandala) is equivalent to the part  of the body it affects (the heart/mind), to the mental functions on which it operates  (the apparatus of consciousness), and finally to the results achieved (the three  siddhis and the three bodies of the Buddha). On the other hand, it is coextensive  as a mandala with the entire universe (Dharmadhatu), the mind, and the sub stance of semiotic activity (the Sanskrit letter A). As a result of such circularity,  salvation is continuously produced and certainly realized. The Ritual is a good  indication that the soteriology of Tantric Buddhism in East Asia is based on se 

miotic practices, in which symbols are manipulated in meditation and ritual ac tion. The text attributes enormous importance to language, especially the absolute  language of mantras, and to the development of particular macrosemiotic for mations composed of a variety of semiotic substances and objects organized in a  quinary series, in which each component is an alloform of all the others. The  previously mentioned stupa (or caitya) is one of these macrosigns. Another ma crosign, related to the previous one, but based on a nine-element system, is the  mandala complex of "moon-heart-lotus" that constitutes a rich support for the  practices described in the text.  

It is precisely the mastering of these macrosemiotic formations that enables one  to attain the goals of practice, be they salvation or this-worldly benefits. In other  words, attainment requires initiation; and initiation, as an act generating symbolic  capital, is directly related to power strategies. This is what is meant by this text  when it warns against careless transmission; easy availability would reduce its  symbolic potential. The text is also explicit about its political position: it ensures  both individual salvation and the protection of the state. In other words, it pres-

TANTRI C BUDDHISM , CHINES E THOUGH T 36 9  

ents itself as a tool for state government against rebellious or revolutionary move ments. It is not surprising, then, that this text and its variants became one of the  ideological pillars of institutional Buddhism in medieval Japan, which described  imperial institutions as inseparable from the Buddhist establishment, and which  effected a general "mandalization" of state territories, as well as of numerous  intellectual and productive practices, thereby turning Japan into a veritable geo political mandala. Some of the presuppositions of such a cultural and ideological  policy are to be found in the Ritual translated below.  

The Ritual, as it appears in the Taisho Canon (vol. 18, no. 905) and in the Manji  Zokuzokyo (no. 102), is a reprint of older versions published in Japan in the early  nineteenth century and based on earlier manuscripts preserved in different tem ples and copied by several people. Those early manuscripts appear to have been  very corrupt. Even though the copyists tried to amend the texts, several mistakes,  repetitions, and obscure expressions still appear in the modern published ver sions. In addition to relying on the aforementioned editions, my translation is  based on the partially annotated version of Kanbayashi Ryujo in Kokuyaku issaikyo:  Mikkyobu (Tokyo: Daito shuppansha, 1931), vol. 3, pp. 95-111 (which contains  a few additional errors). I have made some emendations, for which I am fully  responsible. Significant variants, original terms, as well as my explanatory com ments have been added in square brackets. Except where indicated, all terms  found in italics are Sanskrit.  

Further Reading  

On esoteric Buddhism in East Asia, see Yamasaki Taiko, Shingon: Japanese Esoteric  Buddhism (Boston and London: Shambhala, 1988), and Michel Strickmann, Man tras et mandarins. Le bouddhisme tantrique en Chine (Paris: Gallimard, 1996). On  the semiotics of esoteric Buddhism, see Fabio Rambelli, "Re-inscribing Mandala,"  Studies in Central and East Asian Religions 4 (1991): 1-24; and Rambelli, "Master ing the Invisible," Japanese Religions (forthcoming). On the issue of self-mummi fied buddhas in East Asia, see Bernard Faure, The Rhetoric of Immediacy (Princeton:  Princeton University Press, 1991), especially pp. 148-78. For an introduction to  Taoist ideas and practices concerning the body, see Kristofer Schipper, The Taoist  Body (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1982); and Isabelle  Robinet, Meditation taoiste (Paris: Dervy Livres, 1979). On Chinese medicine, see  Paul U. Unschuld, Medicine in China (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of  California Press, 1985). The Huang-di su wen neijing, on which many notions of  the Ritual are based, is translated in Ilza Veith, ed., The Yellow Emperor's Classic  of Internal Medicine (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press,  1972). For a history of the Ritual, see Jinhua Chen, "The Construction of Early  Tendai Esoteric Buddhism," Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Stud ies 21.1 (1998):21-76. 

370 FABIO RAMBELLI  

Ritual of the Secret Dharanis of the Three Siddhis for the Destruction  of Hell, the Transformation of Karmic Hindrances, and the Liberation  from the Three Conditioned Worlds  

Translated at the Imperial Behest by Subhakarasimha Tripitaka from Central India  

In the practice of yoga there are a thousand ways, but only a small part of them  will be mentioned here. When [Mahavairocana] opens his mouth and moves  his tongue, the Dharmadhatu Palace shakes. All the tathagatas in the Realm of  the Lotus Receptacle emerge from samadhi, hell is destroyed, karmic hin 

drances are transformed positively, and beings are freed from the threefold  conditioned world. One should know that if the Sanskrit letters are properly  inscribed on the crown of the king, the ten thousand countries will be pacified.  If mantras are written on the banners of the envoys from the central govern 

ment, the four directions will be peaceful and provincial governors will be  under control. Also, if Sanskrit letters are written on drums and shell trumpets  [used to give orders in battle], the severe sound of authority will be heard from  afar. Evil spirits will be purified, order will reign over a thousand leagues, crops  will be abundant, and the people will not suffer calamities and diseases; the  deities [will be benevolent], and the weather will be regular. If written upon  war drums after empowerment, through visualization and chanting, the armies  of the enemies will spontaneously surrender without casualties. Such drums  can be called Adamantine drums.  

The pure eyes of Vairocana Buddha,  

open, are like lotus flowers.  

I bow deeply to the master of gods and humans of the three worlds,  the savior with the great bodhicitta.  

The sublime Teachings of Mantric Empowerment [that is, esoteric  Buddhism]  

consist in flowing into the gate of letter A, the unborn.  

The [light of the] signless universal knowledge emitted by the curl  between the Buddha's eyebrows  

permeates and illuminates everywhere, like the sun and the moon;  The karmic activities of body, speech, and mind become the three  mysteries  

and the three mysteries become the Dharma of the Nirmanakaya.  The five natural elements and the five wisdoms become the five parts  [five-syllable mantra],  

and the five parts completely contain the entire Dharmadhatu.  [The four buddhas] Aksobhya, the savior of the world Ratnasambhava,  Amitabha, the king Amoghasiddhi,  

form the auspicious circle of the siddhi,  

transmit this sublime Dharma and convert all living beings; 

TANTRI C BUDDHISM , CHINES E THOUGH T 371  

Trailokyavijaya, the compassionate one with infinite powers,  Vajrasattva, the venerable Acalanatha,  

without breaking their vow, at the right time,  

when the practice of yoga is finished, return to the Diamond Realm.  

The Buddha says:  

The letter A corresponds to [Aksobhya's] Vajra Section and controls the liver.  The letter A is Mahavairocana Tathagata as Dharmakaya of principle, the orig inally pure, ultimate, and ungraspable emptiness [one version adds: the great  bodhicitta innate in all sentient beings]. It is the seed of the adamantine element  earth, the mantra of the Vajra section. In terms of names-and-forms [nama rupa], the earth is the forms. Among the five psychophysical aggregates it is  forms, that is the body, that controls earth. Its seed is impure. In other words,  the five viscera are material dharmas, and since they arise out of the aggregate  of forms, in terms of names-and-forms, the earth corresponds to the forms.  The liver controls the celestial soul [hun in Chinese]. The breath/energy [qi]  of the hun soul becomes the east and wood. Wood is the color of the sky. Wood  controls the spring, and its color is green/blue. Green-blue breath is generated  by wood, and wood is generated by water. The liver is generated by green-blue  breath and by the kidneys; its shape is like a lotus leaf in vertical position. At  the center is located the heart. The flesh heart is in the left part of the chest.  The liver protrudes outside and becomes the eyes; it also controls the muscles.  The muscles stretch out and become the nails. Now, because the five syllables  control the five viscera and the six receptacles, inside and outside intermingle,  as will be explained. If an excessive amount of sour flavor enters the liver, the  liver benefits but the spleen suffers. Should there be no hun soul in the liver,  one would lose sensibility and the lungs would damage the liver, thus causing  an illness. Just as metal overcomes wood, if the lungs are strong the liver is  weak. One should be careful with the lungs. If green-blue breath absorbs white  breath, the diseases of the liver heal, because green-blue breath predominates.  

The syllable vam corresponds to [Amithaba's] Lotus Section and controls  the lungs. The syllable vam is the eleventh transformation of the letter va; the  syllable vi is the third transformation. Its meaning is a development of the  meaning of the letter A. In other words, vam is the seed of the ring of the  element water, the sea of wisdom of Mahavairocana Tathagata. The Dharma 

kaya of Wisdom, as well as the Sambhogakaya, have unconditioned supernat ural powers. Vam is the mantra of the Lotus section. The lungs control the  terrestrial soul [po in Chinese]. The shape of the po is like a flower. It controls  the nose and corresponds to the west and to metal. Metal controls autumn, and  its color is white. The color white is generated from wind, and wind is generated  from the yang breath of earth. Among the five aggregates, it is discerning that  controls wind. Discerning is generated from consciousness; consciousness is  generated from past intentions; past intentions are generated from ignorance;  ignorance is generated from false views; false views in turn are generated from  other false views. This is the cycle of twelve causal factors. The lungs are 

372 FABI O RAMBELL I  

generated from white breath and the spleen. If an excessive amount of spicy  flavor enters the lungs, the lungs will benefit but the liver will suffer. Should  there be no po soul in the lungs, one would become insanely frightened; the  heart would damage the lungs, thus causing illness. Just as fire overcomes  metal, if the heart is strong the lungs are weak. One should be careful with the  heart. If white breath absorbs red breath, the diseases of the lungs heal. White  breath is another name for the lungs.  

The syllable ram corresponds to [Ratnasambhava's] Treasure section and  controls the heart. The syllable ram sows the seed of the fire element in Ma havairocana Tathagata's pure mind. Fire, being the abode of the buddhas of all  times, burns ignorance, defilements, and delusory attachments accumulated by  sentient beings over a beginningless period of time, and generates the seeds of  bodhicitta. The meaning of the syllable ram is a development of the meaning  of the letter A. In other words, since it represents the Tathagata as Nirmana kaya, ram truly is the fire mandala [or mantra, that is, the mandala/mantra of  Acalanatha's samadhi] of the Dharmakaya of Wisdom. The heart controls the  superior soul [shen in Chinese], and its shape is like a bird. South is fire, and  fire controls the summer. Its color is red. Red is generated from fire; fire is  generated from wood. Among the five aggregates it is perception that controls  fire; perception is produced by ideation. Moreover, the heart is generated from  red breath and the liver. The heart protrudes outside and becomes the tongue;  the heart further controls the blood; the blood stretches outside and becomes  milk. It also controls the ear, and turns into the nostrils, the septum of the  nose, the jaws, and the chin. If an excessive amount of bitter flavor enters the  heart, the heart will benefit but the lungs will suffer. Should there be no shen  soul in the heart, one would lose the sense of time; the kidneys would damage  the heart, thus causing an illness. Just as water overcomes fire, if the kidneys  are strong the heart is weak. One should be careful with the kidneys. If red  breath absorbs black breath, the diseases of the heart heal. Red breath is the  syllable ram.  

The syllable ham corresponds to [Amoghasiddhi's] Karma section and con trols the kidneys. The syllable hum is another transformation of the syllable  ha. Ham means that Mahavairocana Tathagata always abides on the seed of the  element wind and longevity. Since the three gates of liberation refer to the fact  that time is ungraspable, ham is the mandala/mantra of the great power of the  Dharmakaya. Wind is controlled by the aggregate of discerning. The five viscera  are: liver, the lungs, heart, spleen, and the kidneys. The stomach is one of the  six receptacles; it is the belly, that is, the one among the six receptacles cor responding to the spleen; it is the sea located within the five viscera and the  six receptacles. All water enters the stomach, which distributes it to the five  viscera and the other receptacles. The five flavors circulate inside the body,  and since the best among them enter the stomach first, the kidneys in particular  receive them from the stomach. The kidneys are located below the waist and  the navel; the one to the left is the kidney proper; the one to the right is calledTANTRI C BUDDHISM , CHINES E THOUGH T 373  

Gate of Life. They lie upon the abdomen [that is, on the stomach]; when they  stretch out they become sperm. The kidneys control the will [shi in Chinese],  and correspond to the north and water. Water controls winter, and its color is  black. Among the five aggregates it is intention that controls water. Intention  is generated from perception, and perception is generated from discerning. The  kidneys are generated from black breath and the lungs, and control the ear.  The kidneys protrude outside and become the bones which control the mar 

row. The marrow stretches out and becomes the ear holes. The bones in turn  stretch out and become the teeth. If an excessive amount of salty flavor enters  the kidneys, the kidneys will benefit but the heart will suffer. Should there be  no shi soul in the kidneys, one will be sad and cry; the spleen will damage the  kidneys, thus causing illness. Just as earth overcomes water, if the spleen is  strong, the kidneys are weak. One should be careful with the spleen. If black  breath absorbs yellow breath, the diseases of the kidneys heal. Black breath is  the syllable ham.  

The syllable kham corresponds to [Mahavairocana's] Void section and con trols the spleen. The syllable kham is the invisible usnisa [that is, the top of  the head, one of the marks of the Buddha representing enlightenment] of Ma havairocana Tathagata which, as the site of the wisdom of Great Emptiness  experienced by the five buddhas, is both principle and wisdom of extinction  (nirvana) and Thusness (tathata). The syllable kham is thus the supreme man dala/mantra, the sacred place where the buddhas of the ten directions and of  all times attain enlightenment. The spleen controls the ideas [yi in Chinese],  and becomes the center and earth. Earth controls the summer and its color is  yellow. Yellow is generated from earth; earth is generated from fire. As ex plained before, the aggregate of forms controls earth [therefore, consciousness  controls space]. Earth also becomes the orb corresponding to wood [that is,  the liver]. The green-blue color of wood corresponds to the sky. The spleen is  generated from the yellow breath and the heart; it controls the mouth and  becomes the yi soul. If an excessive amount of sweet flavor enters the spleen,  the spleen will benefit but the kidneys will suffer. Should there be no yi soul  in the spleen, one would lose the sense of orientation; the liver would damage  the spleen, thus causing illness. Just as wood overcomes earth, if the liver is  strong the spleen is weak. One should be careful with the liver. If yellow breath  absorbs green-blue breath, the diseases of the spleen heal. Yellow breath is the  syllable kham.  

The five viscera are like a lotus turned upside down. What inside the body  are the five viscera outside become the five phases. The former protrude outside  and become objects. These are the forms. Whereas "forms" refer to the four  natural elements and the five senses, "names" refer to the four immaterial ag 

gregates such as discerning, volition, and so on. The sun and the moon, the  five planets, the twelve constellations, and the twenty-eight lunar mansions  form the human body.  

The mountains, the sea, and the earth come from the letter A. The rivers 

374 FABI O RAMBELL I  

and all the water streams come from the syllable vara. Gold, jade, precious  gems, the sun, the moon and the stars, and the light of fire, and jewels come  from the syllable ram. The five cereals, the five fruits, and the blossoming  flowers are produced by the syllable ham. Beautiful people perfumed with won 

derful fragrances, heavenly longevity, a pretty face, a beautiful aspect, fortune,  and wealth display their glory out of the syllable kham.  

The letter A is the east and the tathagata Aksobhya, the syllable vam is the  west and the tathagata Amitabha, the syllable ram is the south and the tathagata  Ratnasambhava, the syllable ham is the north and the tathagata Amoghasiddhi,  the syllable kham is the zenith ["center" according to one version] and the  tathagata Mahavairocana. The meaning of the letter A is extremely profound;  it concerns the substance of emptiness and quiescence and cannot be argued  upon philosophically. The mother of the myriad dharmas, the king of the great  initiation - this is the letter A.  

Since the teachings related to the letter A are difficult to believe in, this text  should not be shown, especially to the precept-masters of the Lesser Vehicle.  The Sanskrit text of the five-syllable mantra comes from the four hundred  thousand words [of the main Tantric scriptures?]; this mantra alone is the  supreme Merit Field [punyaksetra] containing the essence of the Mahavairo 

cana Sutra and the Diamond Head Sutra. The virtues acquired by those who  chant this mantra are incommensurable, unimaginable, and unexplainable.  Contemplation of the fundamental principle through memorization and  chanting of the five-syllable mantra of the Diamond Head Sutra will bring people  fortune. Their bones will be strong and their bodies healthy; forever free from  calamities and diseases, they will cultivate longevity.  

The doctrines concerning this mantra in five syllables are the usnisa [that  is, the highest form] of the five wisdoms, the essence of the five buddhas, the  mother of the wisdom of Sakyamuni [the historical Buddha] and the buddhas  of the ten directions and of all times, the caring parents of all sentient beings,  the treasury of the entire Dharmadhatu. Since it fights against all demons and  always wins, [this mantra] is like armor, halberd, bow, arrow, and staff. For  this reason, buddhas and bodhisattvas of all times are immersed in and emerge  from these five syllables, which are the seeds of the sprouts of the buddhas of  all times.  

The throne for this meditation is yellow; it is the circle of the adamantine  Dharma [esoteric Buddhism], also called the adamantine throne.  

1. A [the text here has the picture of a square] is the adamantine earth.  The letter A is used in the earth throne- and adamantine throne-meditations.  2. Vam [picture of a circle] is the adamantine water. The syllable vam is  used in the water- and lotus-meditations.  

3. Ram [picture of a triangle] is the adamantine fire. The syllable ram is  used in the sun meditation.  

4. Ham [picture of a crescent] is the adamantine wind. The syllable ham  is used in the moon meditation. 

TANTRI C BUDDHISM , CHINES E THOUGH T 375  

5. Kham [picture of a sphere] is the adamantine space. The syllable kham  is used in the space meditation.  

[picture of a five-element stupa]: this is the visualization that the es sence of the Tathagata is unborn.  

The mantra in five syllables is the delicious taste of all the tathagatas' sweet  dew [amrta in Sanskrit] of unbornness, the miraculous medicine of the Buddha  nature. If one syllable penetrates the five viscera, no disease will occur. How  much more powerful will the practice of visualizations of the sun and the moon  be! One will immediately experience the emptiness and the quiescence of the  Buddha body.  

A vam ram ham kham: these five syllables are the mantra of the Dharmakaya.  As for the amount of merit acquired in chanting them once, or seven times, or  twenty-one times, or forty-nine times a day, each chanting is equivalent in  virtue to reading one million times excerpts from the whole Buddhist canon.  How much greater will be the merit of sitting in quiet meditation and entering  samadhi! Thanks to the contemplation of the letter A, the truth is as clear as  the sun shining in the sky. Once the Buddha nature has been realized, the  virtues acquired are incomparable. The texts of the esoteric canon truly tran scend discursive thinking. However, there is the risk that monks with a Sravaka  ["auditor," an original disciple of the Buddha] nature and those who keep the  precepts of the Lesser Vehicle will not only arouse doubts and refuse to believe  these doctrines, but also increase their sins. This is like the king who, even  though he loved his little child so much as to give him all the precious objects  in his treasury without regrets, nevertheless refused to give him Ganjiang and  Moye [two famous ancient swords], because the child was not able to use them  and the king was afraid that he would harm himself. In the same way, the  Tathagata secretly transmits the esoteric teachings only to the great bodhisat tvas and does not make them available to the inferior knowledge of the sravaka.  

Dharmadhatu is the Dharmakaya Tathagata's true reality. In the human body  we distinguish between the upper part, from the armpit to the top of the head;  the middle part, from the navel to the armpit; and the lower part, from the feet  to the navel. Also in the mantras one should distinguish between three different  siddhis [to be acquired].  

Lower siddhi: A ra pa ca na. It is called the "protruding siddhi." It generates  roots and stems and permeates the four directions. To chant it once is like  reading excerpts from the whole canon a hundred times (to chant it once is  like chanting the 84,012 Vedas; the practitioner will be freed from all troubles  and sufferings). When one enters the Tathagata's state of the indifferentiated 

ness of all dharmas, all letters are undifferentiated, and one quickly attains the  great wisdom. If chanted twice, this mantra eliminates all major sins committed  over a hundred million kalpas [eons] of rebirths. [The bodhisattvas] Manjusri  and Samantabhadra extend their protection to the four classes of Buddhists  [that is, monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen] surrounding them. The good  deities, Dharma-protectors endowed with the fearlessness of compassion, 

376 FABI O RAMBELL I  

appear in front of the practitioner [to protect him]. If chanted three times, the  practitioner will attain samadhi; if chanted four times, the practitioner will be  able to remember all the dharanis, if chanted five times, the practitioner will  immediately attain the supreme bodhi.  

Middle siddhi: A vi ra hum kham. Called the "intruding siddhi," it generates  branches and leaves. The intruding siddhi goes from the navel to the heart.  Permeating the four directions, its bright light penetrates Buddha's Dharmad hatu, whence its name. To chant [this mantra] once is like reading excerpts  from the entire canon a thousand times (this mantra is also called the ada mantine formula for the subjugation of the four multitudes of demons and the  six destinations and for the attainment of universal wisdom).  

Upper siddhi: A vam ram ham kham. This is called the "secret siddhi," the  "perfect siddhi," as well as the "susiddhi." Susiddhi permeates the Dharmad hatu. These are the Dharmadhatu's secret words to attain buddhahood and  experience the great bodhi; their light permeates everywhere. Only buddhas  can trespass this threshold; pratyeka-buddhas and Sravakas cannot understand  it; therefore it is called the "secret siddhi." To chant it once is like reading  excerpts from the entire canon one million times.  

The protruding siddhi goes from the feet to the waist; the intruding siddhi  goes from the navel to the heart; and the secret siddhi goes from the heart to  the top of the head; these are the three siddhis. The protruding siddhi is the  attainment of the Nirmanakaya; the intruding siddhi is the attainment of the  Sambhogakaya; and the susiddhi is the attainment of the Dharmakaya. These  truly are the three eternal bodies, the repository of the true Teachings, the  perfect body of the Dharmakaya Mahavairocana, the true source of the Womb  and Vajra mandalas. Therefore I bow my head and pay homage to Mahavai rocana Buddha.  

These three five-syllable mantras, that is, [each of] these five syllables, are  equivalent to the fifteen adamantine samadhis. One syllable is equivalent to all  fifteen syllables, and all fifteen syllables are equivalent to each syllable; each  syllable is equivalent to each set of five syllables, and each set of five syllables  is equivalent to each syllable. The serial visualization in proper order [from  the beginning to the end] or in reverse order [from the end to the beginning]  produce the same result, since the beginning and the end are nondual [that is,  nondistinct]. The following eight meditative practices contain all dharmas.  [The practitioner should see that] each syllable contains all syllables; all syl lables contain each syllable; each syllable explains all syllables; all syllables  explain one syllable; each syllable makes all syllables; all syllables make each  syllable; each syllable destroys all syllables; all syllables destroy the meaning  of each syllable. All the preceding constitutes one meditative set that can be  visualized in the proper order and in reverse order. One should practice the  entire set four times in proper order and four times in reverse order. The benefit  for sentient beings in the entire Dharmadhatu is that they will all become  buddhas. 

TANTRI C BUDDHISM , CHINES E THOUGH T 377  

The shape of the hrdaya-heart of ordinary people is like a closed lotus. Its  muscles form eight sections. In men it is turned upward, in women it is turned  downward. In visualization one should open one's heart to form a white lotus  with eight petals. Upon it as a platform one should see the letter A in golden  color. The letter A is like a square yellow altar, and the practitioner sees oneself  on it. From the letter A comes out the syllable ra, which burns one's body and  reduces it to ashes. From the ashes the syllable va is generated, of a pure white  color. From it, A yam ram ham kham, the mantra of the five elements [of the  cosmic stupa], is produced. This mantra takes its place on the five parts of the  body, from the waist to the top of the head. This is the pure bodhicitta. These  five syllables concur in the creation of the roots of great compassion. The sala  tree of the Buddha grows and fills the entire Dharmadhatu; accordingly, all  dharmas are based upon this five-syllable mantra, which is originally unborn  and transcends language; its substance is pure, without karmic conditionings,  and empty like space. The eight petals of the heart-lotus become a platform,  and the area in the practitioner's body going from the navel to the heart be comes the adamantine platform (a pavilion built on the sea). The navel be comes the ocean; beneath is the abode of all deities [of the mandala], which is  the coastline. From the ocean of compassion of the buddhas arises the Vajra  Wisdom; from the Vajra Wisdom arises the assembly of all buddhas [that is,  the mandala]. On this eight-petaled lotus platform which is the heart one  should then visualize the letter A. This letter emits a massive light that disperses  in the four directions from the heart; then the rays converge again to form a  sort of garland of light like a floral wreath [used in temple decoration] and  pervade all Buddha lands in the universe. This light then encircles the practi tioner's body, shrouding it from the top of the head to the feet. One should  then visualize the syllable am on the top of the head; it turns into the center  of the Womb mandala and produces three rays of light. The first ray turns  around the throat of the practitioner, reaches to the top of the head, and in  the areas brightened by the light, Buddhist deities appear to form the first circle  of the Womb mandala. The second ray of light turns around the heart and goes  from the navel to the throat; Buddhist deities appear to form the second circle  of the Womb mandala. The third ray of light turns around the navel and bright ens the area of the body below the navel, where Buddhist deities appear to  form the third circle of the Womb mandala. This is the heavenly pavilion of  the ordinary world [the residence of the gods between the earth and Brahma's  heaven; or, perhaps, the totality of sacred and profane space]. Forms, colors,  and characteristics of the deities vary, but the practitioner has all of them inside  his own body, as if he were one of the members of the Buddha assembly [that  is, the mandala] himself. His whole body is a mandalic body, that is, the Dhar madhatu body of unlimited salvational powers.  

The central part of the aforementioned Womb mandala is the eight-petaled  lotus representing Mahavairocana's heart. This heart-lotus platform is the cen ter of the mandala; the various buddhas are distributed according to their rank 

378 FABI O RAMBELL I  

on the external lotus. The four directions are the four wisdoms of the Tatha gata, and in the petals situated between them are the four all-embracing [bo dhisattva] virtues [giving, affectionate speech, conduct profitable to the others,  cooperation with others; but also the four Tantric bodhisattvas who convert  beings with hook, rope, chain, and bell]. To the southeast is Samantabhadra,  the sublime cause of bodhicitta. To the southwest is Manjusri, great wisdom.  To the northeast is Maitreya, great compassion. Great compassion is the second  principle. Then to the northwest is Avalokitesvara, who stands for enlighten ment. To realize the goals of one's practices, one should enter the samadhi of  this lotus platform. The first letter A in the lotus is located in the east and  represents the bodhicitta, the beginning of all practices. The yellow color rep resents the Vajra nature; it is called both the "precious banner" and Aksobhya  Buddha. Next, the syllable a is situated in the south. It stands for the religious  practices; its color is red and represents fire. Its meaning is the same as that of  Manjusri, namely, the opening of the lotus; it is also called Ratnasambhava  Buddha. Next, there is the syllable am in the west, standing for the bodhi. The  performance of countless practices results in awakening. Its white color rep resents ultimate wisdom; it also stands for water. Its corresponding buddha is  Amitabha. Next, to the north is the syllable am, which stands for enlighten ment. Its corresponding buddha is Sakyamuni. The syllable stands for the great  nirvana, so called because the practitioner, having expunged the traces, returns  to the origin. Since the sun of the Buddha hides beyond the mountains, the  color [of this stage] is black. Finally, at the center is the syllable amh, standing  for skillful means (upaya). One should know that the substance of such Dhar madhatu in the heart is originally and always characterized by quiet extinction  (nirvana). Accordingly, Mahavairocana's original body, the substance of the  lotus platform, exceeds the eight-petaled lotus, transcends space, surpasses the  realm of mind: only the buddhas can understand it. It is thanks to skillful  means that [the mandala] can manifest all its images even though it is like the  great space; even though its center is empty, it contains all forms. In other  words, the mandala, as the universe of empowerment, being the assembly of  those endowed with infinite salvational powers, appears everywhere in space.  However, this is none other than the single body, the single wisdom, and the  single practice of the Tathagata. Therefore, the eight-petaled lotus is Maha vairocana Tathagata's single substance. Therefore, Mahavairocana at the center  of the mandala is the Dharmakaya. Vajrasattva's Seal (mudra) of Vajra Wisdom  represents prajna [that is, the wisdom acquired with enlightenment]. Avalok itesvara's Seal of the Lotus Holder represents liberation. The mystery of the  body is the power of the Dharmakaya, the mystery of speech is the power of  prajna, and the mystery of the mind is the power of liberation. Since one attains  liberation as a consequence of prajna, liberation depends on prajna. However,  both depend on the substance of the Dharmakaya: they are different but in separable, and if one is missing the other cannot be attained. They are like the  three strokes of the letter I [in Siddham script]. 

TANTRIC BUDDHISM, CHINESE THOUGHT 37 9  

The bodhicitta corresponds to the Vajra section, compassion to the Lotus  section, and skillful means correspond to the Nirmanakaya. Therefore, the  letter A represents the stage inside the womb, and its level of attainment is that  which precedes enlightenment; the letter sa represents the stage outside the  womb, and its level of attainment is enlightenment; the letter va represents the  function [yong in Chinese], and all wheels of Dharma depend on it. The two  manifestations of arbitrary traces [unclear, perhaps a reference to Sambhoga kaya and Nirmanakaya] save the ten worlds. The Tathagata's Seal of Wisdom  is the true aspect of the heart, that is, supreme wisdom. In other words, bod 

hicitta is the cause, compassion is the root, and skillful means are the ultimate.  The meanings of the series of five elements are the causal factors for the prac tices leading to wisdom.  

If a sentient being knows this text's doctrines, the commoners will make  offerings to him in the same way they venerate a caitya [that is, a stupa]. The  caitya is in fact the model of the living body's relics [as described in this text].  Therefore, all devas [godsl and human beings, when praying for good fortune,  make offerings to it. If a practitioner believes these doctrines, he is the recep 

tacle of the Dharmakaya's relics. Furthermore, the Sanskrit terms caitya and  citta refer to the same thing [since they share the same root]. Accordingly,  what is secretly [that is, technically] called "heart" actually is a stupa of the  Buddha. As in the third circle of the Womb mandala [above], one's heart/mind  is the basis. It expands and becomes the center of the Womb mandala, upon  which is the color of nirvana. Accordingly, the caitya is very high. Then, it  expands gradually from the lotus at the center of the Womb mandala and  becomes the universal salvific body of the manifestations of the buddhas, per vading everywhere. Accordingly, the caitya is very wide: its lotus platform is  the entire Dharmadhatu, that is, the cosmic relic of the Dharmakaya. If a sen 

tient being understands this Seal of the Bodhicitta he is like Mahavairocana,  and the commoners will make offerings to him in the same way they venerate  a caitya.  

Therefore, in Mahavairocana's body-and-land, external world and sentient  beings are interpenetrated, essence and signs are identical; Thusness pervades  the Dharmadhatu and the body-speech-mind of the Supreme Self [the enlight ened one] are undifferentiated, like cosmic space. Space is a sacred place, and  the Dharmadhatu is the practitioner's residence. Mahavairocana Tathagata, in  order to spread this doctrine, manifests two Dharmakayas. The Buddha as  Dharmakaya of Wisdom abides in the true principle and, as the Sambhogakaya  for his own enjoyment, manifests the central circle of the Womb mandala and  makes everyone follow the nondual path. The Buddha as Dharmakaya of Prin ciple abides in the undifferentiated and radiant quiescence; absolute, eternal,  and unchanging, he manifests the eight-petaled lotus; as the Sambhogakaya  working for everyone's salvation, he manifests the three circles of the Womb  mandala and makes everyone in the ten worlds attain the Great Emptiness  [enlightenment]. The meanings of Principle and Wisdom show dissimilarities 

3 8 0 FABI O RAMBELLI  

in extension, but they are originally one single dharma and therefore have no  essential differences. All dharmas return to the letter A, and the five syllables  are identical with the single Vairocana.  

_  

Thanks to Mahavairocana Buddha,  

I have opened the seal of the wisdom of the mind,  

I have established the meaning of ritual symbols,  

and possess numberless virtues  

adorning everything.  

Having penetrated the perfection and the powers of the dharani,  together with those who learn and practice, with whom I have karmic  affinities,  

I vow to abide in peace in the sea of supreme purity. 