+++
title = "3 INTRODUCTION"

+++
THE EVALUATION OF THE EVIDENCE FOR DEITY AND spirit possession in South Asia, in both classical texts and modern practice, is framed by prevailing characterizations of such gravity that only with great effort is it possible to escape from beneath their weight—and in doing so it is still impossible to escape their shadow. These characterizations are literary, marked by vocabulary, images, and themes distinguished from an array of related phenomena. They are recognized because of a rich history of scholarship on the general subject of possession. Most such studies, whether Indological or anthropological—or even brahmanical, if we consider the long history of Sanskritic and other indigenous Indic scholarship—have commenced with the necessary chore of phenomenological categorizing and entertaining a potpourri of theoretical approaches. Just as brahmanical and Indological scholarship have set certain limits and challenges on the subject, thereby creating orthodoxies, so have the shifting grounds of anthropological studies, thereby creating mini-orthodoxies of their own. Although the word “orthodoxy” may sound harsh and unjust to some, scattered in this study is an accounting of methodological approaches to and models of possession employed by Indic authors and scholars throughout the millennia, by anthropologists and other ethnographers, as well as psychologists, in the latter cases reflecting Western academic deployment and establishing for them new dimensions. The approaches, addressed in Chapter 2, range from outright condemnation (by apologists for religious orthodoxies) to sophisticated psychoanalytic interpretations, sociopolitical views, notions of possession as a facet of shamanism, and last (and probably least) an increased acceptance, with certain qualifications, by ethnographers, of emic viewpoints regarding the existential reality of spirit and deity possession.+++(4)+++

Both separable and inseparable from these approaches are other general issues, including those of gender and illness. Why, in popular culture, are women subject to possession more regularly than men? Do we find the same gender configuration in possession described in Indic literature? To what extent or under what circumstances does possession signal disease, particularly mental illness? These questions are addressed in due course, and answers to them must consider the purport and environment of the Sanskrit texts as well as their contents. In order to more clearly envision the Sanskritic and classical contexts, it will also be necessary to view the subject from the top down, that is, to discuss the vocabulary and linguistic characterizations of possession in postclassical and modern South Asia. To this end, I explore the semantics of possession and their significations in several South Asian languages (Chapter 4). This discussion begs a consideration of the relationship between “folk possession” and “classical possession,” a topic that is frequently revisited in this study.

## Veda
After explorations of the ethnography and linguistics of possession in (mostly) postclassical South Asia, we turn to the Sanskrit texts. First, we consider the extensive evidence for possession and models of thought based on possession in the vedic literature (Chapter 5). References to possession begin in the Ṛgveda itself, where we first encounter the word āveśa (and other forms derived from the root ā√viś) in the ninth maṇḍala, the book that includes most of the soma hymns. It is significant that āveśa is the most commonly attested word for “possession” in the Ṛgveda through Classical Sanskrit and Middle-Indic languages down to modern times, where it has found its way into most Modern Indo-Aryan and Dravidian languages. I argue that the vedic soma drinkers experienced (at least in part) a type of divine possession. The word āveśa occurs in nearly all vedic texts, with a preponderance in texts of the early and middle vedic periods. +++(4)+++

By the late vedic period, derivatives from another Sanskrit verbal root, √gṛh (to seize), especially the substantive grahaṇa, begin to appear, indicating a rather less divine form of possession.+++(4)+++ 

In attempting to address the vedic evidence, I highlight four features in particular: first, the production of soma and the sages’ experience of its consumption; second, āveśa as a paradigm for cosmic creation and personal and divine incarnation; third, a phenomenon called “transfer of essence” (medhas), found in many vedic texts beginning with the Brāhmaṇas; and, fourth, the relationship between women (mostly) and gandharvas, celestial musicians with a predilection for possession.+++(4)+++ It is this latter notion that has perhaps the greatest impact on later classical literature and “folk possession.” In fact, it is in the vedic texts that the Indian notion of the “self” is first expressed as permeable and multivalent. Some readers may find this notion overly complex because it runs counter to the received Vedāntic idea of the self as an autonomous ātman identified with a universal brahman. However, the evidence here demonstrates that the Vedāntic notion of the self is primarily a normative, albeit a popular and attractive, idea that, because of the force and elegance of much of the Sanskrit philosophical literature, has overshadowed more complex and, I believe, more fundamental notions of self and personhood in classical India.+++(4)+++

## Itihāsas
Possession comes into its own as a literary motif with accompanying procedural specificity in the Mahābhārata, a subject addressed in Chapter 6. Among the possession stories in this great epic are 

- the well-known tale of Nala’s possession by Kali; 
- another in which Vipula Bhārgava protected Ruci, the wife of his guru, Devaśarman, against the sexual advances of the notorious womanizer Indra by entering (anupravisya) the body of Ruci through his yoga-power; 
- the account in the Sauptikaparvan of Asvatthaman’s destructive possession by Rudra/śiva; 
- and the account near the end of the epic in which Vidura, an incarnation of Dharma, employs his yogic abilities to leave his own body, permanently, and enter that of Yudhiṣṭhira. +++(4)+++

Although the Mahābhārata contains many stories in which possession is central, the other Sanskrit epic, the Rāmāyaṇa, frequently refers to possession as a dimension of intense emotion but has few stories in which it is central. Thus the nexus of possession and emotion appears fully developed in the epics, a feature that characterizes Indic possession from that point on. Countless narrative passages in the epics and later literature describe extreme anger, love, anxiety, concern, or faith in terms of possession. 

## Purāṇas
Taking rhetorical leads from the epics, many of the Purāṇas frame possession in the same way; indeed, possession in the same key appears in the Purāṇas with remarkable regularity. It is no exaggeration to say that the Mahābhārata is the most influential text in Indian history, and the tone and timbre of possession, in both its positive and negative manifestations, is established in the Sanskrit epics.+++(4)+++ Because of certain important conceptual links between the epics and the Purāṇas, specifically the way devotion frames possession, it is essential to have a brief look at possession in the Purāṇas as well.

## Darśanas
Among the most visible manifestations of early Indian thought are Vedānta, classical Yoga, Buddhism, and Jainism, all of which are nuanced reactions to the perceived excesses of vedic ritualism. Chapter 7 discusses possession in these important branches of knowledge. Although possession is not a primary concern of the literature of these schools, which, on the whole, avoids discussion of personal experience except in the vaguest, most normative, and most fragmentary ways, it is nevertheless mentioned and occasionally discussed at some length in their foundational philosophical texts.+++(4)+++ 

It occupies a small place in the Yogasūtras of Patañjali and a rather larger one in the Jain Yogaśāstra of Hemacandra. Possession is also discussed in the Brahmasūtras of Bādarāyaṇa and in the commentaries by Śaṇkara, Rāmānuja, and Vallabhācārya. 

The Buddhist Pali canon, where demonologies appear for the first time (in the Petthavatthu), mentions it, as do the Jātaka stories and the more scholastic Buddhist Sanskrit literature. This is an appropriate place to begin to examine possession in Buddhist practice, where it is, in the best-known instance, a highly visible performative phenomenon by the oracle who has assisted the Dalai Lamas in matters ranging from statecraft to personal practice. In all the relevant texts, as in observable practice, possession is not condemned, but considered accessible for individuals who have achieved particular stages of mental and physical discipline. In addition, it is considered useful for gaining certain kinds of knowledge. An example of translating yogic theorizing about possession into practice appears in the hagiographies of the philosopher Śaṅkara, who, it is said, took possession of the body of a dead king named Amaruka in order to gain carnal knowledge without sullying his pure brahmanical and ascetically trained body. This incident must be discussed at some length.

## Classical fiction
Chapter 8 explores possession in Sanskrit and other classical Indic fiction, drama, and aesthetic theory. In the same way that the 1973 film The Exorcist and Henry James’s 1898 novella The Turn of the Screw influenced (and were influenced by) the Western—particularly the Anglophone—imaginaire in its views and experience of possession as a nasty and terrifying phenomenon (discussed in Chapters 2 and 3), stories of possession in India influenced its experience and occupied a major place in the Indian imaginaire. The evidence from Chapters 4 and 12, discussing the language of possession and extensive demonologies, testifies to this. But the influence and experience was not all of a “negative” sort, as tales of possession—especially from the Mahābhārata, the text with the greatest influence of all—did not simply create a psychic locale for dumping one’s worst fears and (one hopes) imprisoning one’s most terrifying ghosts. In addition, these tales opened the psychic doors to possibilities of oracular, divine possession, which is subsequently taken up by different genres of Sanskrit, Middle Indic and modern Indian literature; the tales are a major reason why possession is the most common and, at the grass roots, most valued form of spiritual expression in India.

Possession as a motif in Sanskrit fiction was initially addressed by the American Sanskritist Maurice Bloomfield in 1917. However, he covered only a few of the important texts and examined possession more as a curiosity than as a cultural phenomenon or the reflection of a widespread experience. 

The most important texts in this category are the well-known vampire (vetāla) stories and the massive Kathāsaritsāgara. 

Possession is also referred to in Sanskrit and other classical dramas, including the Bhagavadajjukā-prahasana, a comedy by the seventh-century Pallava king Mahendravarman in which it is the primary theme; indeed, that possession is presented as social satire is itself telling. Perhaps more than elsewhere, in fiction and drama possession is revealed as a well-known (though not particularly well-respected) feature of popular religion (at least among the literati). It is also appropriate in Chapter 8 to attempt to derive a formal aesthetics of possession by examining theories of mood and emotional construction, as well as audience response, in the works of Bharata (Nāṭyaśāstra) and Abhinavagupta (Dhvanyālokalocana), then to locate resonances of this in modern popular culture.

## bhakti
Chapter 9 places possession in the context of devotional practice. This is perhaps the most important aspect of possession, as the intensity of personal engagement is revealed in both text and practice to be the signal determining feature in personality identification. And in India bhakti it is nearly always linked to an intensity driven by a single-minded love for the deity. Thus, in the context of devotional practice, personal identification with a deity is often interpreted as possession. The primary textual locale for this is late first-millennium Sanskrit and Tamil bhakti literature, eventually extending to Hindi, Marathi, and other regional literatures. Although this narrow, interiorized, single-minded (ekāgratā) focus is ostensibly resolute and impenetrable, it is, in South Asia, indicative of the porousness of the self and the fluidity of personhood.

## Tantra and Āyurveda
Chapters 10–13 address possession in Tantra and Āyurveda, discourses that must be examined together to some extent because they increasingly share the same intellectual context. It is here, for the most part, that the notion of possession as “grasping” or “seizing” (grahaṇa) is highlighted, “negative” possession brought on by a malevolent spirit (the influence of the Mahābhārata is also felt here). But this is only a part of the story, as it shares conceptual territory with the “positive” possession most often associated with deities, as well as with interpersonal possession found in texts ranging from the Ṛgveda to the Upaniṣads, the Mahābhārata (again), the Purāṇas, the texts of classical Yoga, and most other texts encountered in the earlier chapters. 

It is important that the Tantras feature oracular possession as an active practice. This is dealt with in Chapters 10 and 11, which cover the ground of normative brahmanical possession and possession found in Buddhist Tantras. 

Chapter 11 addresses a single topic, the practice of using children as agents of oracular possession and the dissemination of this practice from North India to Tibet, China, and South India.

## Medicalization
The usual way in which the Sanskrit texts dealt with negative possession was to identify and classify invasive spirits in demonologies, then to medicalize their possession. The most important and influential texts undertaking this are the foundational works of Āyurveda, as well as a number of Tantras. I offer new translations of the relevant sections of the three primary Āyurvedic texts—the Caraka, Suśruta, and Aṣṭāṅgahṛdaya Saṃhitās—which provide specific demonologies in the context of discussions of insanity (unmāda). 

I also provide extracts from some of the relevant tantric texts, the most important of which is the Īśānaśivagurudevapaddhati, and a hybrid text of Āyurveda, ritual, and dharmaśāstra called Madanamahārṇava.

## Astrology
Because of the importance of astrology in Indian culture for at least two millennia, and because of the perception of planets as graspers or possessors (indeed, the Sanskrit word for “planet” is graha), I must also discuss passages from astrological texts, notably the Praśnamārga, dealing with possession. In summarizing the ritual and pharmacological aspects of exorcism recommended by various āyurvedic, tantric, and astrological texts, I bring into the discussion my own fieldwork on possession among these traditions as they are constituted in present-day Kerala.

## Conclusions
The final chapter offers a few conclusions based on my years of living with this topic. The first identifies typologies of possession that are correlated with language use in order to elucidate the semantics, constituted within the sociolinguistics, of possession. Then follows a discussion of the influence of possession on notions of corporality and personal identity. Essentially, I conclude that possession was both a cause and a result of the generally accepted South Asian notion of a permeable embodiment. This notion, derived from a study of practice, is somewhat at odds with notions of selfhood developed in philosophical texts that have been adopted as canonical from the time of the Upaniṣads to postcolonial India. Perhaps not incidentally it is exhibited more consistently among women or at least applied more generally to women, in accordance with anthropological findings. However, our evidence demonstrates that such permeability is equally applicable to men, though in rather different configurations. 

Finally, I return to the Mahābhārata for an examination of the diachronic aspects of possession. We see in this paramount epic prototypes and patterns of possession that recur throughout Indian history, not just in performance and philosophical construction but in basic problems of self-definition that lie at the root of human multivocality.

Finally, I should say something about Sanskrit text passages in the book, which may appear to be irregular. Because of the length of the book I had to be selective in my choices of transliterated Sanskrit text passages. I include text of the Ṛgveda in Chapter 5 and of passages that are of particular lexical or philological importance scattered elsewhere throughout this work. I have usually omitted the text of passages I have translated of Sanskrit works that are generally available—such as the Upaniṣads, the Mahābhārata, and the published āyurvedic texts—and those that have been translated by others. I hope these decisions do not prove to inconvenience the reader excessively. All translations are my own unless otherwise noted.