+++
title = "10 Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha II’s Śaivas without Pride of Transcendence"

+++
Having established that Jayanta’s view of Saiddhāntika Śaivism as a valid from of  religion is unlikely to have been a minority view in the general Vaidika population  outside Śaiva circles, we must wonder whether it is likely that this view could  have been as general as he says it was in the absence of Śaivas who subscribed to  it themselves. 

There are indeed indications that an ideologically emasculated Śaivism of the  kind outlined by Jayanta did exist and therefore that the great Kashmirian Naiyāyika was indeed expressing the view of an already established segment of the Śaivas themselves. Furthermore, we may suspect that this had become the majority view among them, and that the learned theories of the Śaiva theologians, which  demonstrate how Śaivism is superior to the Vaidika religion, how its rituals and  meditations work on an altogether higher level and its doctrines penetrate far beyond the reach of its rival, were not so much articulations of established, common  belief as fundamentalist attempts to revitalize and recover a tradition that was fast losing a sense of its original calling. Thus Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha, writing in the tenth  century, when Saiddhāntika learning in Kashmir was at its height, tells us that one  of his reasons for writing his commentary on the Saiddhāntika scripture Mataṅga-pārameśvara was to counteract attempts to draw the understanding of the text  into the Vaidika domain, by going back to the foundational doctrines of Sadyo-jyotis and Br̥haspati and sweeping away what he saw as the inauthentic interpretations of the Siddhānta that had developed since the time of these two founding fathers of Saiddhāntika exegesis.81 

- 81. See Mataṅgapārameśvaravr̥tti, Vidyāpāda, Maṅgala vv. 2 and 4 (2 = Mokṣakārikāvr̥tti, Maṅgala v. 1).   For the theses, supported by these verses, (1) that Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha saw his mission as that of returning the Siddhānta to its original purity, freeing it from orthoprax Vaidika and Śākta influences, and    (2) that the success of his mission explains the long period of time between the works of Sadyojyotis  and Brhaspati, c. ad 650–750, and the next surviving works, from tenth-century Kashmir, see Sanderson 2007a. Instead of the edition’s gurūṇām api tau vandyau in 2c the Kashmirian manuscript of the  Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute (P) reads gurūṇām agrato vandyau (not reported in Sanderson 
  2007a), which I judge to be preferable, both in sense and as the lectio difficilior, that is to say, the reading  less readily explained as a corruption of the other. 


And he confirms that this loss of identity was  well advanced when he targets for criticism the view of some at least of his Śaiva  co-religionists that th execution of their regular rituals of worship was merely  the fulfilment of a duty, with no higher purpose than conformity to scriptural  injunction, which is to say, the view of Śaivas who had abandoned a properly Śaiva  perspective and substituted that of the Mīmāṁsaka theorists of Vaidika ritual: 82 

- 82. Mataṅgapārameśvaravr̥tti, introduction to Kriyāpāda 3.100c–101 (p. 66, ll. 3–6). 


> Now, for what purpose do we do [our obligatory Śaiva] rituals, time-fixed and  [incidental]? Some say that our engagement in these is entirely without purpose, [that we do them simply] because they are enjoined [by our scriptures], just as the Mīmāṁsakas [hold with regard to their own obligatory rituals].  That is not correct; because [the two cases, the Vaidika and Śaiva,] are different. For the [Mīmāṁsakas] hold that [their] scriptures are valid because they  are not the product of any conscious being [but are an eternal self-existent  body of injunctions that minds can perceive but have not created]. So they  may well formulate such a view. But in our system [our scriptures are held  to be valid] as the work of all-knowing [God]. So how can [we believe that]  he could teach something that has no purpose? Or rather, if he does so then  he must be comparable to an imbecile or madman and therefore, being non omniscient, not worthy of our regard, with the undesired consequence that our scriptures would be invalid.83 

- 83. For what the Kashmirian Saiddhāntika scholars advocated as the correct view of the superior  purpose of the daily, periodic, and incidental rituals of worship required of Saiddhāntika initiates see  Sanderson 1995, pp. 38–43. 

