+++
title = "Teej"

+++
Teej is a name denoting two different  
Hindu religious observances, both falling  
in the **lunar month** of **Bhadrapada**  
(August–September). Kajari Teej falls on  
the third day of the dark (waxing) half of  
the month and Hartalika Teej two weeks  
later, on the third day of the bright  
(waxing) half. Both of these observances  
have a mythic charter connected with  
the god **Shiva** and his wife **Parvati**, but  
the latter is far more important. Kajari  
Teej is a festival marking the coming of  
the **monsoons**, a season that once  
rendered travel impossible. For lovers  
who were together, the monsoon  
months were very sweet, but for those  
who were apart, the coming of the rains  
foretold a time of separation. One of the  
standard poetic images is the woman  
watching the darkening sky, wondering  
whether her beloved will make it home  
in time. On this day people sing songs  
in the Kajari **raga**, a melodic mode associated both with the rains and with  
songs of separation and longing. On this  
day people also welcome the rainy season  
by setting up swings and swinging on  
them. The festival is celebrated through  
much of India, but especially in the  
**Benares** and Mirzapur districts of the  
eastern part of **Uttar Pradesh**.  
Hartalika Teej (also known as  
Hariyali Teej) is a religious observance  
practiced by young unmarried **women**  
in order to gain a good husband and  
have a happy marriage. In Hindu culture  
the model for the ideal husband is the  
god Shiva, who despite his wild appearance and his unusual habits, is completely devoted to his wife. One sign of  
this devotion is that Shiva and his wife  
Parvati are married only to each other,  
no matter which forms they take—as,  
for instance, when one or the other is  
cursed to be born as a human being. As  
the ideal divine couple, Shiva and  
Parvati are the patron **deities** of this religious observance. Women observing  
this festival should **worship** Shiva and  
Parvati (as the model couple whose happiness they hope to share), decorate  
their houses, put on new clothes, and  
pass the night singing songs of **auspiciousness**. This festival reveals the cultural importance of marriage for Indian  
women. Because the identity for many  
Indian women is still formed primarily  
through their traditional roles as wives  
and mothers, for many women their  
marriage is the most important event in  
their lives.  
The charter myth for Hartalika Teej  
not only underlines the importance of a  
happy marriage but also points to the  
woman’s role in gaining her husband.  
After the death of the **goddess Sati**, she is  
reborn as Parvati in the house of  
**Himalaya**, the mountains personified.  
Very early in life, Parvati vows that she  
will have no husband except for Shiva.  
Her parents try to discourage her from  
this wish because Shiva has taken a  
vow of **asceticism** and passes his time  
deep in meditation on Mount **Kailas**.  
Undeterred, Parvati goes up into the  
mountains and begins to do harsh physical asceticism (**tapas**) of her own. The  
power generated by her asceticism eventually awakens Shiva, and on Hartalika  
Teej he comes to where she is staying,  
disguised as an aged **brahmin**. He first  
tries to discourage Parvati by making disparaging remarks about Shiva’s lifestyle  
and personality, but Parvati refuses to listen and remains unshaken in her resolve.  
Eventually Shiva reveals his true form to  
her, and on that day they are betrothed to  
be married.