+++
title = "Introductory Note by Sampadananda Mishra"

+++

A Mantra, as Sri Aurobindo puts it, “is a word of power and light that comes from the overmind inspiration or from a very high plane of intuition.” \(*The Future Poetry*, SABCL, vol 9, p. 369\) A Mantra is thus an inspired and intuitive and rhythmic utterance, a revealed seeing. It comes out of the “realisation of some inmost truth of God and self and man and Nature and cosmos and life and thing and thought and experience and deed.” \(*The Future Poetry*, SABCL, Vol. 9,P. 199\)

Every Mantra contains in its vibrations a certain power. The very etymology of the word Mantra reveals that it serves as an instrument to elevate the Mind, an instrument which helps the mind to contemplate and plunge into the oceanic depth of silence. The word Mantra is derived from the root sound ‘man’ which means to think, to contemplate or meditate on, to perceive, to understand or comprehend. The sound tra at the end of the word Mantra is a suffix added in the sense of instrumentality. So, Mantra, as per its etymology, is an instrument of or a means for contemplation, meditation, comprehension, perception and of thought. Mantra, in fact, unites the mind with the pure sound. And this union of the mind with the pure sound is considered by the Vedic and Tantric tradition as the highest kind of Yoga. It is in this state that mind becomes free from all its activities and gets absorbed in the silence \(the unmanifest speech\) which is the source of all sounds.

The book, *Mantra Yoga and the Primal Sound* by Dr. David Frawley is not simply a collection of Mantras or an expression of their moral significance; it is an interpretation of the philosophy and the reality of the mantric approach to intelligence and knowledge held within the sound code or vibratory pattern behind the universe itself.

It is believed that all the answers we search for, all the vital responses we seek after, and all the information we need are stored on an energy matrix called the non-local intelligence and that is available to all of us at any time. It is the function of the higher selves and can be accessed through the mantras. But one has to learn the impeccable procedures meant for it. The perfection in approach should result from a dedication of intelligence and mental activity to a projected plane and world of consciousness. The perfect mantric approach and knowledge aligns the energy of the body and mind with the fundamental frequency of the universe and with a consciousness linked energetically to the subtler universal fabric.

The book aims at a perfect explanation of the mantras and a revelation of their perpetual relevance and significance. Now, mantra in the traditional sense no longer exists. There is mantra causing the innovation and invention of modern knowledge and wisdom. A mantric approach to science, technology, information, marketing, media and streams of knowledge is being constantly emphasized.

Sri Aurobindo has presented his longest epic poem, Savitri as a mantra for the transformation of the world. Mantra can only cause transformation as it is the essence of the cosmic response and the invocation of the eternity. Dr. Frawley in his book explores the use of mantras for improving our karmas and actions in life. He also goes on to unravel the profounder mystery besetting the conceptual philosophy of the mantras. His sole aim is to arouse an insight and awareness into the practicalities of mantras.

The author has taken care of explaining the bijamantras, starting with the letters of the Sanskrit alphabet, and leading up to the mantra purusha or body of sound which is considered an important practice in mantra yoga. Gradually he explores the main methods of the mantra yoga starting with mantra and pranayama, mantra and traditional kundalini yoga and the use of divine names and bhakti yoga. The application of the mantra therapy in the Vedic sciences of Ayurvedic medicines, Vedic astrology and vastu sciences, too, form important part of the book.

Here it is mentioned that the mantras alongside pranayama bring greater awareness and energy into both mind and body. Such Pranayama-mantra vibrations can lift the mind into Samadhi or higher states of oneness, which it would otherwise not have access to. The power of mantra can unfold the movement of mind and its habitual pattern and their constant transmutation.

The fundamental significance of the mantra, as indicated by the book, lies solely in exploring deep into the deeper recesses of reality. All existence - as the mind and sense know existence - is manifestation of an eternal and infinite which is to the mind and sense unknowable but not unknowable to its own self awareness. The unmanifest supreme is beyond all definition and description. Whatever the manifestation may be it has behind it something that is beyond itself. Mantra through its positive and constructive vibrations integrates the mind into growing to the vastness of truth and inspiration.

Mantra carries with it the essences of yoga and the yogic consciousness. As man is a mental being, he naturally imagines that mind is the one great leader and an indispensable agent in the universe. But mind is not the greatest possible power of consciousness and not the instrument of truth and knowledge. It is only their ignorant seeker. To rise to the higher levels of consciousness, mind has to be silent, thought- free and immobile. Sri Aurobindo has said that when the mind is still, then truth gets her chance to be heard in the purity of silence. Truth cannot be attained by the mind’s thought but only by identity and silent vision. Mantra plays a great role in creating a blessed quietude and silence in mind, felt by an elevating vibration, to rise to the highest level of yogic consciousness.

The book ultimately reflects that mantra causes a holistic transformation for a perfect realization of truth. It takes the awareness beyond the mental man and its limits. The book teaches us that there is an eternal closeness between the yogic mind and the ever living cosmic vibrations of the universe. The mantras act like a bridge, internally solid but externally unmanifest, from the outer layer of the consciousness to the inner, from within to without and from the surface to the absolute and the supramental. The book stresses the very fact that Mantras are instrumental for the great yogic teaching as well as its primary practices. The mantra gains its own life and consciousness in the very ground of our being.

-Dr. Sampadananda Mishra, Sri Aurobindo Society, Pondicherry


