+++
title = "01"

+++

The Tantrasāra begins by stating that perfect knowledge (pūrṇa-prathā) is the cause of liberation. It is the revelation of śiva-nature in one's own Self. śiva, who by His power of freedom (svātantrya śakti) appears to be limited in knowledge and action, removes all veils by the same power.+++(5)+++ As a result of this, He shines in His pristine, self-refulgent, pure consciousness. On the dawn of supreme knowledge of the nature of light (prakāśa), marked by reflective self-knowledge (vimarśa), everything shines non-differently in the mirror of consciousness.+++(4)+++ While describing the nature of mokṣa, Abhinavagupta writes in the Paramārtha-sāra that there is no separate region of it, nor is one to proceed toward it, but it is to be realized by piercing the knots of ignorance by virtue of the full development of one's own power of freedom. However, mokṣa should not be taken as the effect of knowledge (jñāna) and the latter the cause of it, but as the manifestation of the real nature of the Self (ātman). 

## Ignorance
According to this śa(i)vādvaya system, ignorance is accepted as the cause of saṁsāra, yet the nature of ajñāna is known as āṇava-mala, a limitation innate in the individual. It originates from the absolute freedom of the Lord. The āṇava-mala operates in the individual soul in two ways: 

- (i) the loss to consciousness of its freedom, and 
- (ii) the sense of agency without bodha.

- This limitation of jñāna and kriyā is known as spiritual (pauruṣa) and intellectual/ scriptural (bauddha) ignorance (ajñāna). 

Ignorance, known as bauddha-ajñāna, is of the nature of indetermination (aniścaya-svabhāva) and determination of contradictory nature (viparīta-niścaya).+++(4)+++ Because of the presence of the first, the individual soul in bondage fails to definitely know the real nature of the Self, and because of the second one, experiences and feels himself to be the experiencing subject of what is really non-self, such as: body, intellect, prāṇa, etc. Pauruṣa ajñāna, characterized by limited knowledge brought into existence by āṇava-mala, is considered by Abhinavagupta and his tradition to be the cause of worldly existence. 

Pauruṣa ajñāna can be removed by initiation (diksā), but a person cannot avail himself of it while the impurity known as bauddha ajñāna lying in his intellect remains. This is because initiation is necessarily preceded by the firm conviction regarding right knowledge of the things to be avoided, and right knowledge of the things to be accepted (heyopadeya-niścaya). Right knowledge can only be obtained from the sacred literature (śāstra) taught by Parameśvara. He is the highest authority and origin of all sacred literatures. These revealed texts are the givers of release to the souls in bondage. The number of the revealed texts known as āgamas are ten, eighteen, and sixty-four. For Abhinavagupta, the essence of them is the Trika system, and the most important of them is the Mālinīvijaya Tantra. 

Abhinavagupta writes that he will give an exposition of the Mālinīvijaya, for he argues that unless the real nature of things is determined, one will be unable to attain liberation. It is pure knowledge alone that possesses the quality of bestowing release. 

## sva-bhāva, prakāśa
The highest principle, which is of the nature of light, is Śiva. He, the most desirable of all, is one's own unique nature (sva-bhāva). Light (prakāśa) is pure consciousness, which is the very life of everything; though shining in all, it shines as blue and jar distinctly, separate from each other. This notion of separateness, the knowledge of duality, is considered to be ajñāna, but pure consciousness (caitanya) is really knowledge (jñāna). It is universal (sarva-sāmānya). It is present everywhere, and possesses absolute freedom of wisdom and activity (jñāna-kriyā-vān). The non-shining of this universal light to the person who is limited is the primary ignorance of the Self. 

The light of which we have spoken above is independent. Its independence means that it depends on nothing. It is all-encompassing, eternal, has the nature of assuming all forms, and at the same time it is without any form (sarvākaranirakāra svābhāva). Its absolute freedom is the "power of bliss" (ānanda-śakti), the relish of one's own bliss (ānanda) is iccha-śakti, its self-reflective light is jñāna-śakti, its unifying relation with all is kriyā-śakti.+++(5)+++ 

## upāya-s
śiva, though associated with all His principal śaktis, always remains free from limitations and rests in His blissful nature. When, by His absolute freedom of will, He manifests Himself as limited, He is then known as the bonded soul or limited knowing subject (aṇu). Then, as a result of self-recognition, He again shines as śiva, marked by absolute freedom and unlimited light. By virtue of His absolute freedom, He either shines without any means (anupāya) or sometimes with means (upāya). These upayas, the ways of absorption of the individual consciousness into the divine, may be of the nature of icchā, jñāna, or kriyā.+++(5)+++ These icchā, jñāna, and kriyā are the śaktis of śiva. When a yogin is able to grasp any of them, it becomes easy for him to attain śiva. As the means (upāya) are three, so the forms of absorption (samāveśa) are also three; hence they are known as śāmbhava, śākta, and āṇava samāveśas. +++(4)+++

This, in short, is the summary of the first chapter of the Tantrasāra. 
