+++
title = "03"

+++
The ātman has the characteristics of light and freedom, and is free from all thought constructs (vikalpa). It is śiva, the absolute. It is without parts, the integral whole of infinite light that encompasses everything-the single realm of light where thought does not reach (nirvikalpaika-dhaman). Although an ordinary soul, in its contracted state as a result of the influence of the three impurities (malas), is not different from that light, it is unable to conceive this, and fails to realize its identity with that light. As soon as grace descends on it, even a little, he begins to realize the truth, and by a sudden flash, he is able to perceive that light without the intervention of any upaya.+++(4)+++ This perception is direct and immediate. 

In this perception of light there is no separate entity to be reflected upon. It is of the nature of self-reflection and has the characteristic of vibration. Here the yogin resorts to iccha śakti as a means for realizing his identity with that light. 

The absolute freedom of the Lord (svātantrya-śakti), mentioned above, causes the images of entities (bhāvas) to manifest in the clear mirror of pure consciousness.+++(5)+++ The bhāvas cannot shine by themselves, they shine in the void of consciousness as reflections. For this reason, the Lord is said to be immanent. As this śakti is sentient, not inert, so too is its āmarśa or cognition; that is her self-reflection continues ceaselessly. Her self-reflective nature is known as parā-nāda, which in the āgama literature is represented as a goddess called parāvāk, the Supreme Sound. 

Speech (vāk) is śakti and is not different from reflective awareness (vimarśa). The śaktis which extend and assume the form of the universe are chiefly three: anuttara, icchā, and unmeṣa. Basically, they are nothing but the nature of reflection (parāmarśa), assuming the syllabic form of the letters, such as: “a,” “i," "u."+++(4)+++ It is from them that all the śaktis originate. The fifty syllables of the Sanskrit alphabet come broadly under two groups: the sixteen letters from a to visarga are known as vowels, and the rest, from ka to ha, are consonants. The vowels are the seeds (bījas) and the consonants are the receptacles (yonis) for receiving the seeds.+++(5)+++ 

Primarily, the Lord who is anuttara becomes ānanda, which is the self-reflection of universal consciousness (cit). As cit in its slight vibration becomes intent on externality, it is known as ānanda. Similarly, icchā becomes īśāna when it rests in icchā.+++(?? 4)+++ In the same way, ūrmi is the reflective unmeṣa.+++(4)+++ As syllables, these three are indicated by "a,” "i", "u.” From u onward, kriyā śakti begins to function. The former three parāmarśas have the characteristics of prakāśa.+++(4)+++ Hence, they are of the nature of the sun, and the latter parāmarśas, the long vowels "ā," "ī,” “ū," are of the nature of soma or moon, with the characteristic of rest. +++(5)+++

When icchā and īśāna become inclined toward activity, or, in other words, when activity enters them, disturbance sets in, which causes a break within that tranquility. Then icchā and īśāna are known as iṣyamāṇa. In one, the light is predominant, while the other is of the nature of rest. They are known as “r̥," "r̥̄", "l̥", "l̥̄". They are the only semivowels, and are unlike the consonant sounds of ra and la; therefore they are not considered consonants as such. Since they retain both the vowel and consonant sounds, they are considered to be neuter.+++(4)+++ 

The creative movement which proceeds to flow from anuttara gives rise to different syllables. The impelling force of kriyā śakti terminates after giving rise to the varṇas like "e," "ai," "o," and "au." After that, the inward movement begins to operate. As a result of this, the resultants are then put to rest in anuttara. It is to be noted here that this anuttara is different from anuttara known as akāra, the supreme Bhairava.+++(4)+++ It manifests as aṁ, which is pure consciousness in essence. From that anuttara, visarga unfolds. 

Visarga, better known as visarga-śakti, is the creative force which manifests herself as the universe.+++(5)+++ She remains inseparably united with the Absolute before the rise of agitation in it. The universe as we see it is the manifestation of light as indicated objects (vācya), and in turn, the reflection of that light stands for each of the indicative sounds as represented by "a," "ā,” “i," etc. The manifestation that occurs in this twofold way (vācya and vācaka) is, in reality, the manifestation of vāk, the supreme speech. The supreme, known as akula, is possessed of power (śakti) which gives rise to the universe. This power is called kaulikī Śakti. She retains the universe within herself in a very subtle form, but because of the creative impulse expands herself in three stages. These stages of creation are internal but are projected externally by the Lord by means of His visarga śakti. Creation, as known to us, is predominantly of the nature of difference or duality (bheda); this is the gross form of creation. In the language of the āgamas, it is known as āṇava visarga, creation on the objective level. The creation in which difference and nondifference (bhedābheda) shine is called śākta visarga; this is the subtle form of creation.+++(4)+++ The creation of nondual nature is known as śāmbhava visarga, the subtlest of all creations. 

āṇava visarga shines externally in a gross form. The entire creation consists of the instrument of knowledge and the object of knowledge (pramāṇa and prameya), and knowledge with its limited nature shines as mutually different and also different from the Self. In śākta visarga, however, the universe shines in a dual nondual relation. In āṇava visarga, difference is predominant. It is of the characteristic of ha, while in śākta visarga, all that is experienced (seen, heard, touched, etc.) by the self is obliterated. The universe becomes perfectly intent on pure consciousness. It is the awakening of citta toward cit. Citta, though cit by nature, in its empirical consciousness becomes the experiencing subject, and in its view all objects shine as different from it. This occurs due to the subject object relationship. Because of this relationship, the universe shines with a variety of objects. At this stage, cit, the experiencing subject of the world-picture, descends down to the level of citta by imposing upon itself the limitations of objects. 

In śākta visarga, citta is not shining as the subject and its objects with their mutual differences, but rather, it is shining as one with consciousness. In the former case, the resting and terminating of citta is in objects having limitations, while here it is submerging all sorts of limitations into all-inclusive pure consciousness. For this reason, it is known as citta sambodha, the awakening of citta; that is, in this stage, citta becomes intent on offering itself in the partless nature of śiva, who is characterized as integral Light. 

In śāmbhava visarga, however, there shines neither difference nor non-difference; even the universe is absent there; moreover, not even the slightest trace of citta is perceptible. It shines as universal consciousness (cit), free from all limitations, and remains completely refulgent in its perfection. This is the highest visarga, characterized by ānanda. 

The person who has realized his identity with that light experiences that everything from the earth to śiva shines in the mirror of consciousness. The very nature of śāmbhavopāya is this kind of comprehension. Abhinavagupta has presented this idea in the Tantrāloka in this way: Bhairava, the clear void of consciousness, creates the picture of the universe in Himself. He manifests it and experiences: “I am the universe.” Thus, He assumes an immanent nature; this is His function of creation. Then, He maintains the six-fold paths and experiences them as being reflected in Himself Thus, He is the one who manifests maintenance. Lastly, the entire universe is withdrawn and dissolved into the flame of all-consum ing fire; this is His function of dissolution. 

The person who is able to realize the partless one as the single, integral unity of consciousness in which these three functions-creation, maintenance, and dissolution-have their rise and rest, is absorbed in the supreme by means of śāmbhavopāya. 
