+++
title = "06"

+++

Chapter Six describes the method for the realization of essential reality by external means. In the preceding chapter, Abhinavagupta describes āṇavopāya, which helps the aspirant attain absorption into the divine Self through the means of uccāra, dhyāna, varṇa, and karaṇa. The present section discusses how a yogin adopts prāṇavāyu as the means for attaining his or her desired goal. 

From this chapter onward, whatever is described up to Chapter Twelve comes under the “formation of the place" (sthāna-prakalpana). The locations are three: the vital energy, the body, and other external objects. 

The six paths (adhvas) are immense. They have their base in general prāṇa, while the adhva known as time (kāla) has its base in a specific prāṇa. 

The objects shine in two ways, either with sequence or with out any sequence. The act of confining anything within limits (kalana) is the function of time (kāla). Although pure consciousness is free from all limiting adjuncts, the universe in the form of the knower and the known is made manifest by its freedom of will. As a result, they shine forth with their distinctive and limited character. The agency of the delimiting power of consciousness is known as kāla śakti, which is power in the form of time. However, before the apparent externalization of objects, sequence and non sequence remain latent in its pure nature. The entire universe not only remains inseparably one with the light (prakāśa), but in order to show itself as limited, prakāśa at first negates the universe and experiences “I am transcending the universe." Thus, the void (śūnya) transcending everything is known as śūnya pramātā, the knowing subject of the void. 

Because of its association with impurity (āṇava mala), the knowing subject of the void (sūnya pramātā) becomes externally inclined, and the universe that was previously rejected or negated is now thought of as the most desirable object. Then a vibrating upsurge occurs in it, which shows itself as prāṇa. 

Prāṇa is the first expansion of consciousness. It shows itself as spanda, the very nature of self-reflection. For this reason, prāṇa is said to be predominantly of the nature of the power of activity (kriyā śakti). Therefore, though it is inert (jada), it is primarily of the nature of consciousness. For this reason, by resorting to prāṇa, the aspirant is able to attain the supreme reality. 

Prāṇa is the very life of every living being. It is always on the move. Because of its activities in different locations of the body, the universal prāṇa is known as prāṇa, apāna, samāna, udāna, and vyāna. Of these five, prāṇa and apāna function as the activity of inhaling and exhaling. The incoming movement of the breath starts from the heart and ends "twelve fingers above one's head," known as dvādaśānta, while the outgoing movement of the breath starts from dvādaśānta and ends at the heart. This movement con tinues and goes on functioning 21,600 times in a single day. 

prāṇa is the manifest form of śakti, and all the six adhvas -namely, varṇa, mantra, and pada on the one hand, and kalā, tat tva, and bhūvana on the other-have their respective locations in it. It is to be noted here that adhvas are generally known as paths which lead the aspirant in a sequence to the supreme. In the end, however, for the one in whom the right view of nonduality has developed, these adhvas become absorbed in I-consciousness. For this reason, adhvas are not simply paths but are also something that is absorbed. 

Hence the yogin makes an effort to realize the supreme real ity by resorting to prāṇa, and thus puts an end to the mutations caused by the impelling force of time. 

By its nature prāṇa is constantly vibrating. This vibration arises spontaneously in the location of kanda (bulb) below the generative organ. The spontaneous movement of prāṇa bestows little spiritual result in comparison with the movement of the vital energy that is caused by the conscious effort of the yogin. Hence, by his deliberate effort in association with jyeștha śakti, the yogin tries to impel his prāṇa from the center of the heart along the path upward so that it may reach the dvādaśānta, twelve fingers above one's head. After letting it rest there, it is made to move again toward the heart. This ingoing and outgoing process is sim ply known as inhaling and exhaling, but to the yogin it means something else. In the primary stage, the yogin with keen observa tion watches each movement of prāṇa rising in the heart, proceed ing upward and coming back into the heart again. He divides the whole course of prāṇa into sixteen divisions. Each of these sixteen divisions is known as tuṭi, representing a day. Similarly, the exha lation represents a night. When the yogin becomes sufficiently proficient, he then takes each movement of prāṇa and apāna to represent a month. 

The course along which prāṇa and apāna move measures thirty-six digits (anguli). The yogin assumes that the hour, the tithi, and other long and short units of time get their rise in prāṇa. It should be noted here that kriyā śakti, which operates externally as kāla śakti in prāṇa, is without any definite form. For this rea son, whatever shines in prāṇa as measures of very small amounts of time, such as kṣana, lava, and so forth, may shine as a year or more than several years. Not only do they shine and rise in it, but they also terminate in the highest equilibrium. 

When prāṇa runs the course of two and one-quarter digits, the duration is known as a tuṭi. Four of such tuṭis make a prahara, while half of a tuṭi is known as gap (sandhyā). The exhaling and the inhaling represent the day and the night. 

In the same way, the yogin also conceives that a month, consist ing of thirty lunar days (tithis) with broad divisions of two fort nights, rises in prāṇa. All the tithis from the first day of the lunar fortnight (pratipad) to the night of new moon (amāvāsya), and then again from pratipad to the full moon day (pārṇima), lie along the course of the inhaling and exhaling movement of prāṇa and apāna. The sixteenth tithi, consisting of half a tuṭi at the start and another half at the final resting place, is considered to be the san dhyā, the meeting point of the day and the night. These two halves of tuṭis are free from the influence of time, and for this reason sandhyās are considered to be very auspicious. Similarly, during the dark fortnight, the moon or the apāna offers its digits (kalā) one by one to prāṇa, the sun, and the final one is offered near the dvādaśānta at the fifteenth tuṭi, after which the moon itself gets dissolved into the sun. This is known as amāvāsya, when the moon remains latent in the kalā known as ama. When the span of one half of the tuṭi occupied by amāvāsya gets into the portion of pratipad, the duration of the tithi is cut short and therefore a solar eclipse occurs. The eclipse obliterates the difference of the know ing subject (pramātā), the instrument of knowledge (pramāṇa), and the objects known (prameya). Therefore, the occasion is con sidered to be auspicious because it bestows otherworldly results. 

Similarly, a year is supposed to get its rise in a single move ment of prāṇa. For this reason, the entire course of the movement of prāṇa and apāna corresponds with uttarayaṇa (the progress of the sun to the north) and dakśināyaṇa (the progress of the sun to the south). In this case, the tithis occupy only one-fifth of a digit and the "sun's passage from one sign of the zodiac (rāśi) to another” (samkrānti) occurs every six digits. 

For the purpose of minimizing the influence of time, the yogin further strives to get twelve years to rise in a single movement of prāṇa and apāna. He locates sixty tithis in a digit, and the passage of one rāsi to another is supposed to be the duration of a year. In this way, he is able to observe the duration of twelve years in the single movement of prāṇa and apāna. 

Like prāṇa, time is thought to arise in apāna. It arises in the heart and goes down to mūlādhāra. Just as Brahmā and others are supposed to be the causal deities residing in different locations, namely, in the heart and other places as mentioned above, in the same way, they are said to have their locations in the heart and other places down to kanda, etc. The yogin meditates upon the dei ties as the causal agents of the stages of childhood, youth, old age, death, rebirth, and liberation of the embodied soul. From Brahmā to Anasrita, these six are considered to be the cause of different states through which a living being must pass. As they give rise to these stages of life, in the beginning they are accepted by the yogin, but are ultimately rejected by him. To him, the most accept able object is the supreme Goddess, the seventh, called unmanā. Once the aspirant is united with unmanā, it is possible for him to reach beyond these states. 

The movement of apāna ends in the dvādaśānta, otherwise known as the yoginivaktra. If the yogin is able to find rest there, the distinctions of the upper and the lower will be put to rest forever. 

This method is followed similarly in samāna. Samāna arises in the navel, flows along the 72,000 nādis of the body, and becomes manifest in the heart. It flows along the ten principal nādis: idā, piṇgalā, suṣumnā, gandhari, hastijihva, alambuśa, puśa, kuhu, and samkhini; but of these, the first three are the most important. The heart is like a lotus with eight petals pointing to eight direc tions. Because of its association with eight directions, it imitates the activities of the Lord of directions, and appears to be cruel or placid. It is known as samāna because it remains uniformly in the body. Just as an equinox (viṣuvat) occurs in prāṇa, similarly, the yogin ascertains five passages (samkrantis) and two equinoxes (viṣuvats) during one day. They also occur during the night in the same way. It is well known that visuvats are the equinoxes, when the day and night are of equal duration. This time is considered to be very auspicious. 

The movement of udāna proceeds from the heart up to the dvādaśānta, a center of prāṇa twelve fingers above the head. The yogin tries to watch the entire measure of time from one tuṭi to sixty years in the single movement of udāna. It is thought to have the characteristic of vibration (spandarūpa). Vyāna is all-perva sive by nature, and so it is free from sequence; still, time arises there in the form of a subtle vibration. 

The subtle forms of the vowels of the Sanskrit alphabet (varnas) arise without any effort, but in their gross forms, the varṇas rise through personal effort. The syllables are of three kinds: transcendent, subtle, and gross. The transcendent are of two kinds: parātama is the highest form that preserves a distinc tion among the vowels, while nāda is an uncreated sound, hence it is known as anāhata, a sound that resounds ceaselessly without beginning or end. It is united with all the syllables as their source, and in this sense is the supreme transcendent form of sound with out distinctions. 
