+++
title = "14"

+++
This chapter describes the procedure of initiation called putraka. On the third day after anointment, a mandala or diagram con sisting of three tridents with a lotus on each prong is drawn on the ground. All the rituals described in this chapter are to be performed in relation to it. Those groups of deities called the "external retinues" and the "deities at the door" are worshipped outside. Then, in front of the mandala, moving from northeast to southeast, Ganesa, one's teacher (guru), the teacher's teacher (paramagurus), the lineage of previous teachers, the yoginis, the Goddess of Speech (Vāgiśvarī), and kṣetrapalas are worshipped. After receiving their permission, the teacher worships the nine paths (adhvas) in the tridents. On the middle prong of the middle most trident, the Goddess Srīparā and Bhairava are worshipped; the Goddess Śrīāparā is worshipped on the left, and the Goddess Śrīparāparā on the right. On the trident to the right, Srīparāparā is placed in the middle prong, while on the trident to the left Sriāparā is placed in the middle. Bhagavati is the supreme Goddess, and because of her presence everywhere, all activities become perfect, 

INTRODUCTION 41 

and therefore all the rituals should be performed in the middle most prong of the middle trident. 

Then, the teacher meditates on the unification of the jar (kumbha), kalaśa, mandala, agni, and the self as one. He cog nizes the all-pervading aham as being present everywhere through the method known as mantranādi prayoga. 

He sees to it that all the articles for the ritual are not collected in a miserly way. If the person is poor, on the other hand, mahā mandala yāga is not recommended. 

Then, the author describes animal sacrifice (pasu homa). When it is complete, the teacher brings the disciple in front of him. and performs all the adhvanyāsas in his body, and purifies his inauspicious deeds, provided he is desirous of bhoga. In the case of the disciple who desires mokṣa, both his auspicious and inaus. picious deeds should be purified. Then, the teacher, reflecting on the main mantra, purifies all the adhvas abiding in the disciple's body, meditating on the nondual nature of śiva. 

After attaining oneness of consciousness, the teacher abides in the body of the disciple from his toes to the top of his head, and having absorbed the consciousness of the disciple's body, the teacher rests, along with the disciple, in the ocean of bliss, which is in essence the wealth of freedom. The teacher merges along with him into the Lord, resplendent with icchā, jñāna, and kriyā. Thus, the disciple becomes non-different from the Lord. If the disciple is desirous of bhoga, the teacher unites him with that par ticular principle. Finally, the teacher bestows on him a pure body for performing deeds in mundane life. 
