+++
title = "Preface"

+++

One day in May of 1980 in South Fallsburg, I was sitting in my room in between programs at the Siddha Yoga Ashram reading some science fiction book, when Muktānanda came in the room. As always, when Swami Muktānanda came in the room, every body's foreheads immediately hit the floor, and that day was no exception.+++(5)+++ Mine was on the floor immediately. The first thing Muktānanda did in looking around the room while I was on the floor was to note there was a book on the bed. He asked me what it was. I told him, and he said, “Don't read that; read Kashmir Saivism." And that began my decades-long interest in the study of what is now called Sakta-Saivism. 

One of the great deficiencies that those of us who have an inter est in Saivism have suffered under is the absence of qualified scholars who are willing to engage in translation projects. The Buddhists are fortunate enough to have living traditions-esoteric Saivism lost its last living lineage holder with the passing of Swami Lakshman Joo-and a great deal of reserve of both cultural and financial capital in the organizations that promote Vajrayana Buddhism, and none of this has existed in support of those of us who have great interest in esoteric Saivism. Because of that, I have caused many different works to become translated.

This particular project has been going on so long, I can't even remember when it started. After Swami Muktānanda passed away, I began visiting Swami Lakshman Joo in Srinagar. I was never really able to stay there long enough to really study with him or to consider myself a student of his, but I was and am a great admirer of him. His blending of intellectual development and a uniquely human quality of compassion was really extraordinary, and he was an extremely beautiful person. Sometime in the early 1990s, how ever, it became too difficult to go to Kashmir, because of the politics of the place. Still intent on continuing my reading and study of Kashmir Saivism, and having met all the Kashmiri pandits, I went to Benares to meet Pandit H.N. Chakravarty. In doing so, I also met many of the people associated with him in Benares, such as Bettina Bāumer and Pandit Kamalakar Mishra, whose work on Kashmir Saivism I published more than a decade ago. At the time I met Pandit Chakravarty, I requested him to translate the Tantrasāra into English, and he agreed. And so we launched on the project, and it was a couple of years later that he delivered a manu script which, in fact, was absolutely unreadable. While his knowledge of Saivism was deep, his English was extremely limited, and there was really nothing I could do about the publication of the manuscript; it was just impossible. So it languished for years, until there was pressure from Chakravarty's side and from some of his friends in Canada for us to do something about the manuscript. What eventually came about was that Boris Marjanovic took on the project, and it was really his effort to bring a readable English translation of the Tantrasāra out that has given renewed life to this project and ultimately brought it to the extremely fine state that it is in. 

Boris Marjanovic deserves an enormous amount of credit for the existence of this manuscript in the quality that it is. I am grate ful to Pandit H.N. Chakravarty and to all of his friends, including Bettina Bāumer, for her support, and I am especially grateful to Boris Marjanovic. 


Swami Chetanānanda  
January, 2012  
