+++
title = "Graha of Alma"
+++

(The peculiar case of an American girl from 1895 CE, from a report by Mason in the JAMA. In H medicine the same might have been described as seizure by one of the skanda-graha-s or an agent of kubera.)

Alma Z. was an unusually healthy and intellectual girl, a strong and attractive character, a leading spirit in whatever she undertook, whether in study, sport, or society. From overwork in school, and overtaxed strength in a case of sickness at home, her health was completely broken down, and after two years of great suffering suddenly a second personality appeared. In a peculiar child-like and Indian-like dialect she announced herself as “Twoey," and that she had come to help “Number One” in her suffering. The condition of “Number One” was at this time most deplorable; there was great pain, extreme debility, frequent attacks of syncope+++(=fainting)+++, insomnia, and a mercurial stomatitis+++(=lip inflammation)+++ which had been kept up for months by way of medical treatment and which rendered it nearly impossible to take nourishment in any form. “Twoey" was vivacious and cheerful, full of quaint and witty talk, never lost consciousness, and could take abundant nourishment, which she declared she must do for the sake of “Number One."+++(5)+++ Her talk was most quaint and fascinating, but without a trace of the acquired knowledge of the primary personality. She gave frequent evidence of supranormal intelligence regarding events transpiring in the neighbourhood. It was at this time that the case came under my observation, and has remained so for the past ten years. 

Four years later, under depressing circumstances, a third personality made its appearance and announced itself as “The Boy." This personality was entirely distinct and different from either of the others. It remained the chief alternating personality for four years, when “Twoey" again returned.

All these personalities, though absolutely different and characteristic, were delightful each in its own way, and "Twoey" especially was, and still is, the delight of the friends who are permitted to know her, whenever she makes her appearance; and this is always at times of unusual fatigue, mental excitement, or prostration; then she comes and remains days at a time. The original self retains her superiority when she is present, and the others are always perfectly devoted to her interest and comfort. “Number One” has no personal knowledge of either of the other personalities, but she knows them well, and especially “Twoey," from the report of others and from characteristic letters which are often received from her; and “Number One” greatly enjoys the spicy, witty, and often useful messages which come to her through these letters and the report of friends.