+++
title = "00"

+++

## Contents

Volume ii

list of illustrations 

vii

**19** – Historical and social Contexts

aNDERs aNDRéN 

391

**20** – laws and assemblies

sTEfaN BRiNK 

445

**21** – Ethics

JoHN liNDoW 

479

**22** – gender

JUDy QUiNN 

509

**23** – Kings and Rulers

JENs PETER sCHJøDT 

529

**24** – Warrior Bands

JENs PETER sCHJøDT 

559

**25** – Various Ways of Communicating

JENs PETER sCHJøDT 

589

**26** – Magic and Religion

sTEPHEN a. MiTCHEll 

643

vi 

Contents

**27** – Ritual space

ToRUN ZaCHRissoN and aNDERs aNDRéN 

671

**28** – Ritual Time and Time Reckoning

aNDREas NoRDBERg 

725

**29** – Cultic leaders and Religious specialists

olof sUNDqVisT 

739

**30** – Crisis Rituals

JENs PETER sCHJøDT 

781

**31** – Cyclical Rituals

JENs PETER sCHJøDT 

797

**32** – Passage Rituals

JENs PETER sCHJøDT 

823

**33** – Death Ritual and Mortuary Behaviour

NEil PRiCE 

853

**34** – Worlds of the Dead

JoHN liNDoW and aNDERs aNDRéN 

897

**35** – fate

JoHN liNDoW 

927

**36** – The Divine, the Human, and in Between

JoHN liNDoW and JENs PETER sCHJøDT 

951

## list of illustrations

**Chapter 19 – Historical and Social Contexts**

figure 19.1. inhumation grave from Birka with a set of weapons, 

interpreted as a grave for a man. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 392

figure 19.2. Rune stone at Hassmyra in fläckebo in Västmanland. . . . . . . . . . 393

figure 19.3. iron neck-ring from Birka, interpreted as a fetter for a slave. . . 394

figure 19.4. arable fields from the early iron age at stånga on gotland.. . . 397

figure 19.5. Reconstructed cross-section of a longhouse 

from the iron age. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 401

figure 19.6. Plan of a large farm at Övetorp in algutsrum on Öland, from the third to the sixth/seventh centuries ce. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403

figure 19.7. an iron age village at Rosendal in Böda on Öland.. . . . . . . . . . . . 404

figure 19.8. The early iron age village at Hodde in Jylland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406

figure 19.9. Reconstruction of an iron age farm 

at Ullandhaug in Rogaland.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407

figure 19.10. Map of central places and early towns 

in southern scandinavia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410

figure 19.11. Plan of Tissø on sjælland showing archaeological 

excavations, find spots, and the former extent of the lake Tissø. . . . . . . . . . 412

figure 19.12. Reconstruction of the central place Uppåkra in skåne in the tenth century. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 413

figure 19.13. The so-called royal mounds in gamla Uppsala 

in Uppland, with remains of the former cathedral.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414

viii 

list of iLLUSTRATIONS

figure 19.14. Plan of Helgö in Uppland, with house terraces 

and burial grounds. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415

figure 19.15. aerial photo of the flat settlement area at Birka. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 419

figure 19.16. Reconstruction of Hedeby at Viking Museum Haithabu. . . . . 420

figure 19.17. Plan of Kaupang, with settlements 

and surrounding burial grounds.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 421

figure 19.18. Map of scandinavia and major regional names 

for different parts of the scandi navian agrarian settlement.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 424

figure 19.19. Map of the medieval province of småland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 428

figure 19.20. Weapon deposits in southern scandinavia 

and the approximate area of many hundreds of hillforts 

and ringforts in central scandinavia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 436

figure 19.21. The burial ground at Valsgärde in Uppland, 

from the fifth to the eleventh centuries.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 439

figure 19.22. important places during the formation 

of the Danish Christian state in the late tenth century.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 441

**Chapter 20 – Laws and Assemblies**

figure 20.1. Roman altar from Hadrian’s wall, with a votive 

inscription to Mars Thingsus, interpreted as a reference 

to the germanic god Tīwaz/Týr. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 447

figure 20.2. The icelandic *alþingi* \(general assembly\) site at Þingvellir.. . . . . 454

figure 20.3. The assembly site at Bällsta, ‘arkels tingstad’ 

in Vallentuna in Uppland.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 455

figure 20.4. anundshög at Badelunda in Västmanland 

and a tall rune stone erected in front of the mound. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 456

figure 20.5. an iron ring from forsa in Hälsingland, 

dated probably to the ninth century. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 459

figure 20.6. The opening page of the *Older Gulaþing Law*, Codex Rantzovianus.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 465

list of iLLUSTRATIONS * *

ix

**Chapter 21 – Ethics**

figure 21.1. Rune stone from about 1000, later built into 

the medieval church at Hällestad in skåne.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 484

figure 21.2. The runic monument at Björketorp in Blekinge 

from the seventh century. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 493

figure 21.3. Rune stone at Rörbro in Nöttja in finnveden 

\(south-west småland\) from *c. * 1000.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 502

**Chapter 22 – Gender**

figure 22.1. Reconstruction of a possible *vǫlva* grave at fyrkat in northern Jylland.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 517

**Chapter 23 – Kings and Rulers**

figure 23.1. a sceptre from the royal ship burial at sutton Hoo 

in suffolk, dated to the early seventh century. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 533

figure 23.2. an eyebrow of a helmet from Uppåkra in skåne, 

dated to the seventh or eighth century. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 540

figure 23.3. Drinking vessels from rich inhumation graves, dated to the third and fourth centuries, from Himlingøje in stevns on sjælland. . . . . 542

figure 23.4. a large grave-mound at inglinge in Östra Torsås 

in Värend \(southern småland\). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 549

figure 23.5. Example of the first swedish coins, minted by 

olof skötkonung in sigtuna. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 557

**Chapter 24 – Warrior Bands**

figure 24.1. The geometrically planned ringfort at fyrkat 

in central Jylland, dated to the 980s. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 562

figure 24.2. Destroyed weapons from the large weapon deposit 

at illerup in central Jylland, from about 200 ce. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 564

figure 24.3. Reconstruction of a warrior dressed in a bear skin, based on a grave from Hjärterum in Kuddy in Östergötland, 

dated to about 100 bce.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 566

x 

list of iLLUSTRATIONS

figure 24.4. Plan of the fortified hilltop settlement at Runsa 

in Ed in Uppland, dated to the fifth and sixth centuries. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 567

figure 24.5. Plan of a hall in Birka, dated to the tenth century.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 568

figure 24.6. Bronze matrices for producing helmet plates, 

dated to *c. * 600, found at Björnhovda in Torslunda on Öland. . . . . . . . . . . . 576

figure 24.7. Detail of the top panel of the picture stone from Hunninge in Klinte on gotland, dated to the ninth or tenth century.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 584

**Chapter 25 – Various Ways of Communicating**

figure 25.1. Panel from the gundestrup cauldron, dated to 

the second or first centuries bce. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 611

figure 25.2. Horse skull pierced by a flint dagger, 

from a bog at Ullstorp in skåne.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 613

figure 25.3. The bog body from Tollund in central Jylland, 

dated to about 375–210 bce.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 623

figure 25.4. Picture stone from stora Hammars in lärbro 

on gotland, dated to the ninth or tenth century. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 627

figure 25.5. a procession of men, women, and carriages on one 

of the tapestries from oseberg, dated to the early ninth century. . . . . . . . . 631

figure 25.6. Plan of a ritual road at Rösaring in låssa in Uppland, dated to the Viking age. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 632

**Chapter 26 – Magic and Religion**

figure 26.1. Runic amulet of bronze from Högstena in Västergötland.. . . . . 660

figure 26.2. fragment of a human skull dated to the eighth century, from Ribe in Jylland.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 661

figure 26.3. Runic amulet from Kvinneby on Öland, 

dated to the eleventh century.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 662

figure 26.4. Runic inscription from søndre søstergården in Bergen, dated to the twelfth century. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 663

figure 26.5. House from the village of Vallhagar on gotland, 

dated between the third and the sixth centuries. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 665

list of iLLUSTRATIONS * *

xi

**Chapter 27 – Ritual Space**

figure 27.1. The weapon deposit site of Ejsbøl mose in southern Jylland, surrounded by rising shore lines that created a natural theatre. . . . . . . . . . . 674

figure 27.2. a wooden figure from the ritual site at forlev Nymølle in middle Jylland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 675

figure 27.3. Two stone heads from Ravlunda in skåne. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 676

figure 27.4. important ritual sites from the iron age in scandinavia. . . . . . . 679

figure 27.5. Plan of Käringsjön in Halland, with ritual deposits along the shorelines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 682

figure 27.6. The bog body from grauballe in central Jylland, 

dated to the early third century bce.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 685

figure 27.7. Excavation of deposited human bones at alken Enge, 

in central Jylland, from the early first century ce.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 686

figure 27.8. Roman bronze figure from lake fysingen in Uppland. . . . . . . . . . 688

figure 27.9. Destroyed weapons and other equipment 

from the former lake at illerup. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 690

figure 27.10. an exquisite Viking age sword, with a gilded sword-hilt, deposited at Dybäck in skåne.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 692

figure 27.11. Remains of a boat deposited at Kvalsund 

in Møre and Romsdal.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 695

figure 27.12. gold collar deposited at Ålleberg in Västergötland. . . . . . . . . . . 696

figure 27.13. Plan of the ritual building at Uppåkra with distribution of gold foil figures and a tentative reconstruction of the house.. . . . . . . . . . 698

figure 27.14. Plan of the central part of Helgö, building group 2, including the main hall and distribution of ritual deposits. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 700

figure 27.15. Plan of the central part of Tissø, including the 

main hall and the ritual building within an enclosure.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 701

figure 27.16. Plan of gamla Uppsala, including grave mounds, 

house terraces, ritual roads, ordinary settlement, and minor 

burial grounds. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 704

xii 

list of iLLUSTRATIONS

figure 27.17. Wooden figure from a bog at Rude Eskildstrup 

on sjælland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 706

figure 27.18. a stone altar, with a stone face and stone troughs at Rossland in Rogaland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 707

figure 27.19. Reconstruction of a ritual building at Borg 

in Östergötland.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708

figure 27.20. Plan of Hofstaðir in northern iceland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 709

figure 27.21. Plan of frösvi in Närke. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 711

figure 27.22. aerial view of the sacred grove in lunda, 

northern södermanland, during excavation.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 712

figure 27.23. Plan of götavi in Närke.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 713

figure 27.24. Plan of the ritual site at lilla Ullevi 

in southern Uppland.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 714

figure 27.25. large rings with three smaller rings attached 

from lilla Ullevi in southern Uppland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715

figure 27.26. Map of the former lake skedemosse and its surroundings. . . 717

**Chapter 28 – Ritual Time and Time Reckoning**

figure 28.1. Runic calendar staff from from Nyköping 

in södermanland, dated to the thirteenth century.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 732

**Chapter 29 – Cultic Leaders and Religious Specialists**

figure 29.1. Runic amulet of bone from lindholmen in skåne, 

dated to about 400–550. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 748

figure 29.2. The rune stone at snoldelev in sjælland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 756

figure 29.3. a panel on the picture stone from Tängelgårda 

on gotland, dated to the ninth or tenth century. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 766

figure 29.4. The top of an iron staff, with a representation of a house.. . . . . . 778

list of iLLUSTRATIONS * *

xiii

**Chapter 30 – Crisis Rituals**

figure 30.1. ship from the weapon deposit at Nydam 

in southern Jylland. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 783

figure 30.2. a staff of yew from a bog at Hemdrup in skarp salling in Himmerland, northern Jylland, dated to the ninth or tenth century.. . . . 785

figure 30.3. an attempt to reconstruct the dress and equipment 

of Þorbjǫrg lítilvǫlva. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 791

**Chapter 31 – Cyclical Rituals**

figure 31.1. Plan of the central part of lejre, with halls 

and possible ritual buildings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 813

figure 31.2. Reconstruction of the main hall at gamla Uppsala 

in the seventh and eighth centuries. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 819

**Chapter 32 – Passage Rituals**

figure 32.1. a richly furnished grave of a girl about ten years old, at ire in Hellvi on gotland, from the tenth century. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 827

figure 32.2. a gold foil figure with an embracing couple 

from Krokek in Östergötland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 828

figure 32.3. ‘Mora stenar’ according to olaus Magnus in 

*Historia de gentibus septentrionalibus*, a history of the Nordic people, printed in Rome in 1555. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 843

**Chapter 33 – Death Ritual and Mortuary Behaviour**

figure 33.1. Burial ground consisting of mounds at Kånna in 

finnveden \(south-western småland\) from the late iron age. . . . . . . . . . . . 865

figure 33.2. a cremation grave with a Þórr’s hammer ring placed on top of the urn, from the burial ground in söderby on lovö, Uppland. . . . . . . 866

figure 33.3. Burial ground at Trullhalsar in anga on gotland, 

dated to the late iron age.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 867

figure 33.4. Excavation of a grave at gnista 

in the parish of Danmark in Uppland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 871

xiv 

list of iLLUSTRATIONS

figure 33.5. Woman buried in a carriage at a small burial ground by the ringfort fyrkat in northern Jylland from the late tenth century.. . . . . 873

figure 33.6. one of the richly furnished inhumation graves at 

Himlingøje in stevns on sjælland, dated to the third century ce. . . . . . . . 874

figure 33.7. The ship-setting ‘ales stenar’ at Kåseberga on the 

south coast of skåne, probably constructed in the sixth century. . . . . . . . . 876

figure 33.8. aerial view of the burial ground at lindholm Høje 

in Vendsyssel in northern Jylland, dated to the late iron age.. . . . . . . . . . . 879

figure 33.9. Reconstruction of a chamber grave in Birka, 

with the dead woman seated in the grave.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 881

figure 33.10. Reconstruction of the final phase of the burial 

at oseberg in Vestfold in 834. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 883

figure 33.11. Raknehaugen in Ullensaker in akershus. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 887

figure 33.12. Double inhumation grave from the eighth century 

in Birka. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 888

figure 33.13. Reconstruction of the burial of seven men in the 

small boat grave at salme on saaremaa \(Ösel\) in Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 891

**Chapter 34 – Worlds of the Dead**

figure 34.1. The picture stone from ardre on gotland.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907

figure 34.2. Boat grave at Valsgärde in Uppland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 908

figure 34.3. The richly decorated carriage from the boat grave 

at oseberg in Vestfold. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 906

figure 34.4. four mounds with ‘south-west gates’ at the 

burial ground of Tuna in Västerljung in södermanland.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 919

**Chapter 35 – Fate**

figure 35.1. a so called ‘weaving sword’ from Våga 

in oppland, Norway, dated to the Viking age. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 932

figure 35.2. Rune stone at Tumbo in södermanland, 

dated to about 1000.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 935

list of iLLUSTRATIONS * *

xv

**Chapter 36 – The Divine, the Human, and In Between**

figure 36.1. Detail of the picture stone at ardre on gotland, 

dated to the ninth century.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 969

figure 36.2. Weland the smith on the front panel of the franks casket, an anglo-saxon casket from the early eighth century. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 970

figure 36.3. a ‘birdman’ from Uppåkra, inter preted as Vǫlundr. . . . . . . . . . . . 971

figure 36.4. Three depictions of important events 

in the life of sigurðr fáfnisbani. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 974

