+++
title = "Vasishtha"

+++
In Hindu mythology, one of the Seven  
Sages whose names mark exogamous  
clan “lineages” (**gotra**; in exogamous  
groups members must marry outside  
the group); the others are **Gautama**,  
**Bharadvaja**, **Kashyapa**, **Bhrgu**, **Atri**, and  
**Vishvamitra**. All **brahmins** are believed  
to be descended from these seven sages,  
with each family taking the name of its  
progenitor as its gotra name. In modern  
times, these gotra divisions are still  
important, since marriage within the  
gotra is forbidden. After her marriage,  
the new bride adopts her husband’s  
gotra as part of her new identity.  
In the **Ramayana**, the earlier of the  
two great Hindu epics, Vasishtha is a  
very powerful sage who is the **guru** to  
the kings of the Solar dynasty, including  
King **Dasharatha** and his **son**, **Rama**.  
Vasishtha is also famous for his longstanding feud with the sage  
Vishvamitra, which causes numerous  
confrontations. The feud’s genesis is  
ultimately rooted in the difference in  
status between **kshatriyas** and brahmins. Vishvamitra is a king who stops  
with a host of retainers at the forest  
**ashram** of the brahmin Vasishtha. Upon  
asking for food, Vishvamitra is amazed  
at the ability of Vasishtha’s **cow**, the  
**Kamadhenu**, to provide food for everyone. Vishvamitra first tries to buy the  
Kamadhenu, then tries to take it by  
force, but his minions are defeated by  
the **magic** powers generated by  
Vasishtha’s **tapas** (**ascetic** practices).  
Vishvamitra finally admits defeat and  
begins to do ascetic practices to generate power of his own. Two of their  
most celebrated clashes are over King  
**Trishanku** and his son, **Harishchandra**;  
in each case the real issue is the mutual  
antipathy of these two sages. See also  
**marriage prohibitions**.