+++
title = "Village Deities"

+++
According to popular Hindu tradition,  
the universe has 330 million gods. The  
richness of this mythic imagination can  
be seen in the composition of the Hindu  
pantheon, in which hundreds of major  
and minor **deities** have been given form,  
identity, and mythic history. Yet aside  
from these deities, who have been given  
an identifiable form, there are also a  
host of village deities found throughout  
India. In most cases, the village deity is  
exactly that—the deity who protects,  
watches over, and acts as a divine overseer for a particular village or locale.  
One of their most common functions is  
to protect the village from disease, either  
of people or livestock, and to provide  
remedies when disease strikes. They are  
also the guardians of the village, defending it from **ghosts** and unseen powers,  
as well as protecting the villagers from  
danger and misfortune.  
The authority of these deities is generally quite limited—in most cases, it does  
not extend beyond the village itself. In  
most cases, village deities have no welldefined mythic history, form, or personality. At times they will have a temple  
dedicated to them, but in other cases the  
village deity is believed to be associated  
with a particular tree or is represented by  
a post in the village square. Village deities  
are usually nonvegetarian, demanding  
**animal sacrifices** and **offerings** of  
**blood** in exchange for their services.  
Relationships with these deities are highly  
pragmatic—the villagers make offerings,  
and the deities protect, but beyond  
these offerings there is usually little  
organized **worship**. If these deities have  
any organized priesthood, it is almost  
always non-**brahmin** because the impurity (**ashaucha**) generated by animal sacrifices would be unacceptable to  
752  
Vikramaditya  
brahmins. These priesthoods are intermediaries between the deity and the villagers, usually communicating with the  
deities through **dreams** or **possession**. In  
this way the deities’ wishes become  
known, and problems or concerns can  
find their solution.  
In some cases, local deities have gained  
greater stature and have been assimilated  
into the pantheon. For female deities, this  
process is fairly simple, since they can be  
brought into the pantheon by claiming  
that their temples are one of the **Shakti**  
**Pithas**, a network of sites sacred to the  
**Goddess** that spreads throughout the subcontinent. Each Shakti Pitha marks the site  
where a body part of the dismembered  
goddess **Sati** fell to **earth**, taking form there  
as a different goddess; all these individual  
goddesses are thus seen as manifestations  
of a single great Goddess. Male deities are  
more commonly assimilated into the pantheon as manifestations of the god **Vishnu**,  
and three prominent examples of the former are **Jagannath**, **Vithoba**, and  
**Venkateshvara**. Village deities are less  
commonly said to be forms of the god  
**Shiva**, but this has happened with  
**Khandoba**, an important regional deity in  
the state of **Maharashtra**. See also **pitha**.