+++
title = "Foreword"

+++

Tantrasāra (TS), as its name suggests, is the summary of impor tant notions, principles, doctrines, and practices found in the Tantras in general and in the Tantrāloka (TA) in particular. The TĀ is Abhinavagupta's most extensive work on the principles of nondual Saiva doctrines written in verse, while the TS, which is its summary, is significantly shorter and written in prose. 

It was the tradition of some of the ancient pandits belonging to different schools of Indian thought to write brief and simplified versions of the main principles and doctrines of their schools.+++(4)+++ The purpose of this practice was to provide those interested in the subject but unable to devote years of study to Sanskrit grammar and logic, deemed prerequisites for the study of any other branch of learning, with a simplified and comprehensible overview of the main principles of their respective schools. Abhinavagupta and his disciple Kșemarāja wholeheartedly embraced this practice. As early as the second benedictory verse of the TS, Abhinavagupta declares the complexity, vastness, and depth of the topics discussed in the TĀ as the main reason for writing its short version. 

The primary aim of the TS is to make knowledge easily accessible; thus, Abhinavagupta avoids getting into complex and lengthy philosophical arguments and elaboration, and lays out the subject matter smoothly and concisely. For us, on the other hand, who are attempting to study and to understand this text a millennium later, the brevity of the style of the TS presents a significant chal lenge. Furthermore, the Sanskrit used by Abhinavagupta in the TS is not easy, and the notions and practices found in it are obscure and sometimes incomprehensible. It is because of these difficulties that this text remains inaccessible not only to the general public but also to Sanskrit scholars and Indologists whose specialty is outside of Tantric studies. However, it should be pointed out here that a reader at the time of Abhinavagupta would have experienced significantly less difficulty in understanding this text than we are experiencing today, especially when it comes to ritual practices and observances. The reason for this is that the tradition was alive and its teaching and practices were widespread and therefore understandable to those interested in learning them. 

For example, in Chapter Sixteen, Abhinavagupta speaks of the application of the net (jālaprayoga), the procedure by which the initiator catches the departed souls during the ritual of initiation. There he explains that these departed souls, for one reason or another, hadn't received initiation before their death but deserved to be initiated because of their service to the teacher or some other devout activity. It is the command of śiva, Abhinavagupta further clarifies, that the teacher, through the application of the net, should bring a departed soul to enter the figure of kusha, a grass that represents a departed devotee, and then per form the initiation procedure. This knowledge, according to Abhinavagupta's own admission, was transmitted to him orally by his teacher śambhunātha. It is difficult to fully comprehend from the available sources what the nature, method, and application of this practice were. It seems clear, however, that the power of the deep meditation of the teacher was believed to be the deciding factor for the success of the entire process.

As already pointed out, the brevity of the style of the TS presents a serious difficulty in understanding this text. Fortunately, these doctrines are often discussed at length by the same author in his TĀ as well as in his other works. The translator then is required to read the TĀ along with the TS if intent on grasping the meaning and wider context of topics discussed. Thus, the TĀ and the TS complement each other,+++(5)+++ although on rare occasions the translator is fortunate to find additional information or explanations in the TS itself that were left out and not elaborated on in the TĀ. This conforms to the style of Abhinavagupta that he adopted from his teacher śambhunātha, which was not to keep knowledge completely hidden but also not to reveal it all at one place or in a single book. This, of course, is meant to provide necessary practice for students as well as to test their devotion to knowledge. 

Finally, Abhinavagupta refers to a number of Tantric and other texts that are now lost to us, including the Bhairavakulormi Tantra, Nitya Tantra, Parameśvarānuttara Tantra, Tantrasadbhāva Tantra, Yogasañcāra, and other texts which have clearly influenced his thought. Fortunately, in recent years some of these texts; such as Tantrasadbhāva Tantra were edited and made available to scholars. 

My association with Pandit Chakravarty goes back to 1997. At that time I lived in Varanasi with the intention of reading Sanskrit texts with Prof. Shri Narayana Mishra. Shri Narayana Mishra was the first and the most important of my teachers during the time I worked on my Ph.D. thesis and other projects. It is because of his selfless teaching style that I learned how to read and understand śāstric texts. 

As I was primarily interested in Kashmiri Saiva philosophy and practices, I began to visit the home of Pandit Chakravarty, a renowned Tantric scholar with profound understanding of Kash miri Saivism. His recognition as a scholar was derived from his lifelong study of Sanskrit and its philosophy, but more than that, his recognition came from his close association with Mahamahopādhyaya Gopinath Kaviraj.+++(4)+++ During one of many conversations that we had, I found out that in addition to already publishing his translation of the T'S in Hindi, he had also completed the English translation of the same text. Furthermore, he told me that he had submitted the manuscript for publication to Rudra Press many years ago. However, for reasons unknown to him, the publication of his work had never taken place. It was only several years later when I met Sharon Ward, the head of Rudra Press at that time, that I learned the reason: She explained to me that they felt that the translation was in need of a good editor, which, because of the complexity of the text, they were unable to provide. It was then that she suggested that I work together with Pandit Chakravarty and help him put the translation of the TS into English that would be understandable to a wider audience.

When we began to work together in the summer of 2004, I soon discovered that the problem with Pandit Chakravarty's English translation was not the lack of knowledge of the English language on his part but his desire and insistence on literal translations. Thus, his English translation preserved the syntax of Sanskrit sentences, which, combined with the obscurity of the text, resulted in English sentences that were incomprehensible. We spent the next two years going carefully through the text sentence by sentence. In addition to helping him to express the Sanskrit text in simple and easily understandable English sentences I have written explanatory note for Chapters Twelve through Twenty-Two as well as several notes for Chapter Nine. 

Generally speaking, the problem with reading translations of Sanskrit philosophical texts is that a reader is usually unfamiliar with the style and technical terminology used by the ancient Sanskrit authors. Sanskrit philosophical literature is specialized literature, the understanding of which requires training. Thus, the readers of this translation might find it difficult to grasp the mean ing of some parts of this text. In order to overcome this problem, Pandit Chakravarty conveniently summarized each chapter of TS and included it in his Introduction. I strongly recommend that any one who makes the effort to study this text in depth first carefully read his Introduction. 

Boris Marjanovic  
Los Angeles December 18, 2011  


