+++
title = "17 Emptiness and Dust: Zen Dharma"

+++

Transmission Rituals  

William Bodiford  

Although the Shingon lineage of Kukai (774 - 835) and the Tendai lineage of  Saicho (767 - 822) can be most readily identified as the Tantric mainstream  within Japanese Buddhism, we must not overlook the pervasive influence of Tan tric rituals, Tantric deities, and Tantric symbolism on Japanese religious traditions  in general. Even today fire invocations (homa in Sanskrit, goma in Japanese), for  example, are ubiquitous not just in Shingon and Tendai, but also in Hosso, Ni chiren, and Zen lineages, as well as in Shinto (Japan's so-called "native" religion),  mountain asceticism (shugendo), and many New Age religions, such as Agonshu.  In medieval times, before the eighteenth-century renaissance of Buddhist schol arship gave birth to a heightened sense of sectarian identity among these lineages,  Tantric imagery was even more common than it is now. For this reason, scholars  of Japanese culture often refer to medieval Japanese religions as kenmitsu (com bined exoteric and esoteric Tantric) Buddhism.  

Prime examples of Tantric tendencies within medieval Zen can be found in the  once common practice of secret initiations into the esoteric lore of Zen, and in  the documents (kirikami) on which the contents of such initiations were recorded.  These initiations were reserved for the most advanced disciples, those who would  inherit the dharma lineage of their master and thereby become Zen masters in  their own right. Conducted in absolute secrecy over a period of several weeks or  months, the initiations would reveal to the disciple both special ritual techniques,  which the master and disciple would rehearse, as well as the symbolic associations  from which the ritual techniques derived their religious power. Over the course  of the initiations, the disciple would record on separate single sheets of paper (the  original meaning of the term kirikami) key terms, signs, and gestures for each  ritual. Some of the rituals taught in this way were exactly the same as the ones  transmitted in Shingon or Tendai lineages. The most interesting initiation docu ments for students of Zen, however, are the ones that focus on Zen itself. 

3 0 0 WILLIA M BODIFOR D  

Two such documents are translated below. While reading these translations, it  is important to remember that these documents have become available to the  general public only because modern-day Zen masters no longer maintain the  tradition of esoteric initiations that such documents represent. They have also  abandoned, therefore, the traditions of hands-on knowledge and oral explanation  necessary to understand fully the content of these texts. For this reason, much of  the symbolism remains obscure.  

The first document, entitled "Emptiness and Dust Ritual" (Kujinsho) concerns  the ritual of dharma transmission in which the disciple merges his mind and his  body with that of his teacher. Its title implies the merging of the universal, timeless  truth of emptiness (sunyata), or buddhahood, with limited, historical phenomena  (the dust of ordinary existence). It explains the mythological origins of the Zen  lineage in just such a ritual union and how this same form of union must be  reenacted in present-day dharma transmission ceremonies. The mythological or 

igin of Zen, of course, lies in the oft-told story of how one day on Vulture Peak  (Grdhrakuta) Sakyamuni, the historical Buddha, preached a sermon not with  words but by holding up a flower. Maha Kasyapa was the only one of Sakyamuni's  many disciples who grasped the true significance of this wordless teaching, which  he expressed by a slight smile. Sakyamuni thereupon selected Maha Kasyapa to  inherit his dharma robe and his dharma lineage as the second Zen ancestor.  Although this story might seem to suggest that the secret, wordless, mind-to 

mind transmission of the true dharma occurred at the moment when Sakyamuni's  flower met Maha Kasyapa's smile, in reality, according to our document, the  formal conveyance of the dharma did not occur until a secret ceremony later that  night.  

The Emptiness and Dust Ritual document explains how the spiritual union of  Sakyamuni and his disciple was symbolized by a wide variety of ritual forms that  the contemporary Zen master and his disciple must reenact: flames leap from  one torch to the next (symbolized in the document by a two-headed flaming  chicken); teacher and disciple reflect one another by covering their faces with  mirrors; they mix their blood together, and they use their mixed blood as ink to  write their names together; the teacher anoints the disciple, who then anoints the  teacher. After each ritual element the teacher and disciple must recite together:  "Future generations must never terminate the lineage of the buddha-to-buddha  transmission."  

The most powerful tangible symbol created during this ritual is a genealogical  table known as "blood lineage" chart (kechimyaku). Beginning with Sakyamuni,  the table lists the names of each generation (both real and imagined) of Zen  ancestors down to the present. This list of names constitutes a "blood lineage"  (kechimyaku) in several senses of the word. First, as mentioned above, the master  and disciple physically mix their blood together to produce ink for writing the  chart. The spiritual connection between each individual person named provides  the life blood that sustains the religious experience of Zen awakening, and the  written list of names forms a text that can be used as a magical talisman to confirm 

EMPTINES S AND DUS T 301  

the faith of the present generation in the reality of that awakening. In popular  religious lore, a properly written blood lineage chart can exorcise ghosts and free  the dead from the torments of hell. The intangible, wordless essence of the Buddha  wisdom is symbolized by Vajra Jewel Precepts (kongo ho fan) that are transmitted  along with the blood lineage chart. For this reason, the Emptiness and Dust Ritual  document identifies dharma transmission ritual as a special kind of precept or dination ceremony.  

The second document, entitled The Unsurpassed Ultimate Blood Line of the Bo dhisattva Precepts in the Orthodox Transmission of the Buddhas and Ancestors (Busso  shoden bosatsukai kechimyaku saigoku mujo no koto), makes explicit the soteriolog ical implications of the first document. It begins by asserting that the blood lineage  is the fundamental body of all buddhas and all living beings. The circle surround ing the names of Sakyamuni Buddha and Maha Kasyapa at the head of the lineage  chart signifies the true blood lineage, which is none other than the bright "moon  disk" of wisdom that "constitutes the fundamental mind of living beings." It goes  on to explain that the disciple attains sudden awakening at the moment when he  receives the ordination with the Vajra Jewel Precepts. In this awakened state, all  dualities, including all distinctions between good and evil, collapse. Every aspect  of the precept ordination is charged with soteriological significance. The teacher's  bowing to the disciple enacts the descent of the universal (honji) into the particular  (suijaku), whereas the disciple's bowing to the teacher represents the ascent of the  particular into the universal. The union of both ascent and descent is achieved as  both teacher and disciple leave the initiation site together. A five-colored string  is tied around the blood lineage chart because living beings fundamentally are  the Five Wisdom Buddhas of the Womb Mandala. The string is tied with nine  knots because living beings possess nine types of consciousness, and so forth.  

The physical layouts of the original documents are also noteworthy. The Emp tiness and Dust Ritual document is long and thin, with a circle at the top of the  document, followed by text, followed by a list of names, and concluding with  more text. The circle at the top of the document contains the names of Sakyamuni  Buddha and his disciple Maha Kasyapa. The circle itself is labeled as depicting a  small mirror of the type that the teacher and disciple will wear on their heads  during the dharma transmission ritual. The list of names in the middle of the  document consists of all the Indian, Chinese, and Japanese patriarchs in the Zen  genealogy. The dictionary forms of the names of the first ten Japanese Zen masters  listed are as follows: Dogen (1200-1253), Ejo (1198-1280), Gikai (1219-1309),  Keizan Jokin (1264-1325), Gasan Joseki (1276-1366), Tsugen Jakurei (1322- 1391), Tenshin Jisho (d. 1413), Kido Choo (d. 1410), Sesso Ichijun (1377- 

1455), and Tenno Soin (d. 1467). A red line, written in the blood of the master  and disciple, runs from the top circle down the right margin of the text through  the list of names and then back up the left margin back to the circle. The Emptiness  and Dust Ritual document also contains a brief glossary of the esoteric meaning  of each word in the phrase "I entrust (fuzoku) so-and-so with the Lineage of the  Wisdom Eye that Perceives the True Dharma (shdbogenzo), the Marvelous Mind 

3 0 2 WILLIA M BODIFOR D  

of Nirvana (shobo genzo nehan myoshin)." Both documents conclude with fictitious  stories that tell how the original copies of the documents were brought to Japan  from China by Dogen, the founder of the Soto lineage of Japanese Zen. Finally,  both documents are signed and dated by Kyugai Donryo, about whom nothing  is known other than the fact that he once served as the abbot of Yokoji Zen  monastery.  

The Kujinsho kirikami, copied in 1637 by Kyugai Donryo is a Yokoji (Ishikawa  prefecture) initiation document. It was photographed September 5, 1980 by Ka neda Hiroshi. (Kaneda serial nos. 2-5). The transcription is in Ishikawa Rikizan,  "Chusei Sotoshu kirikami no bunrui shiron, 12: shitsunai (shiho, sanmotsu, kech imyaku) kankei o chushin to shite," Komazawa daigaku Bukkyo gakubu ronshu 19  (1988): 165-167.  

Busso shoden bosatsukai kechimyaku saigoku mujo no koto, copied in 1622 by  Kyugai Donryo, seal by Meian Tosai, is also a Yokoji (Ishikawa prefecture) initi ation document. It was photographed September 5, 1980 by Kaneda Hiroshi  (Kaneda serial nos. 101-2). The transcription is in Ishikawa Rikizan, "Chusei  Sotoshu kirikami no bunrui shiron, 14: shitsunai (shiho, sanmotsu, kechimyaku)  kankei o chushin to shite," Komazawa daigaku Bukkyo gakubu ronshu 20 (1989):  

Further Reading  

Regarding the roles of secret initiations and precept ordinations in the develop ment of Zen Buddhism in Japan, see William M. Bodiford, Soto Zen in Medieval  Japan (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1993), as well as two of his forth coming articles: "Bodhidharma's Precepts in Japan," and "Documents of Insight:  Initiation Documents (kirikami) in Japanese Zen." The ways that Zen monastic  rituals serve to construct religious authority from dharma lineages is illustrated  in Robert H. Sharf, "The Idolization of Enlightenment: On the Mummification of  Ch'an Masters in Medieval China," History of Religions 32 (1992): 1-31. Although  a serviceable overview of the full range of Japanese Tantric Buddhism does not  exist, readers will find in Taiko Yamasaki, Shingon: Japanese Esoteric Buddhism  (Boston: Shambhala, 1988) an excellent account of how one contemporary Shin gon practitioner views his own tradition. Stanley Weinstein, "The Beginnings of  Esoteric Buddhism in Japan: The Neglected Tendai Tradition," Journal of Asian  Studies 34 (1974): 177-91, points out how Shingon historical scholarship tends  to slight the contributions of Saicho. Nonsectarian accounts of specific Tantric  rituals can be found in Michel Strickmann, "Homa in East Asia," in Agni: The  Vedic Ritual of the Fire Altar, edited by Frits Staal (Berkeley and Los Angeles:  University of California Press, 1983), vol. 2, pp. 418-55, and in two articles by  James Sanford: "The Abominable Tachikawa Skull Ritual," Monumenta Nipponica  46 (1991): 1-20, and "Breath of Life: The Esoteric Nenbutsu," in Esoteric Bud-EMPTINES S AND DUS T 303  

dhism in japan, edited by Ian Astley-Kristensen (Copenhagen and Aarhus: Seminar  for Buddhist Studies, 1994), pp. 65-98. The same volume (pp. 37-64) also  contains Ian Reader's account of the Agonshu, "Appropriated Images: Esoteric  Themes in a Japanese New Religion." Finally, parallels between the Shingon teach 

ings of Kukai and the Zen teachings of Dogen are discussed by David E. Shaner,  The Body-Mind Experience in Japanese Buddhism (Albany: State University of New  York Press, 1985).  

Emptiness and Dust Ritual  

[Written inside a circle:] A bright mirror, 4.2 inches in diameter. The great  master Sakyamuni Buddha - Maha Kasyapa - . .. . [A line extends down the  right margin of the text to the remainder of the lineage chart found below.]  

First year of Shoan [1299], senior water year of the horse, fourth moon, fif teenth day; lecture concerning Sakyamuni holding up the flower:  Sakyamuni raised the flower before a huge audience of eighty thousand,  including five hundred senior disciples. Although the entire audience turned  their heads and looked at the same sight, they did not fathom Sakyamuni's  heart. Only Maha Kasyapa smiled. Sakyamuni said: "I have the Lineage of the  Wisdom Eye that Perceives the True Dharma, the Marvelous Mind of Nirvana  (nehan myoshin). I entrust it with Maha Kasyapa. Later tonight I will perform  the Buddha-to-Buddha Dharma Transmission Ceremony."  

In the middle of the night Maha Kasyapa silently sneaked past the gaze of  the audience of eighty thousand, including five hundred senior disciples, and  entered Sakyamuni's cave at the base of the Udumbara Tree next to the moun tain stream on Vulture Peak. The cave was four bays wide. Sakyamuni sat facing  west on the golden-lion throne situated on the east side of the room. Maha  Kasyapa sat on the west side, facing east. Because of the darkness outside it  was difficult to discern their shared location. Just then a flaming chicken flew  into the room. A flaming chicken is a type of bird with two heads and red and  white spots in nine places. Flames blaze from between its two heads. In that  room it appeared just like the flame of a lamp. Thus, it signifies the location  where dharma fires of wisdom erupt.  

Sakyamuni turned toward heaven and kowtowed three times. Maha Kasyapa  placed his seating mat over Sakyamuni's mat and kowtowed three times. Then  they performed the ceremony of the past buddhas and present buddhas. Facing  two mirrors toward each other, they performed the kasaya robe ritual, covering  their heads with the mirrors. Sakyamuni took the upper mirror and Maha  KaSyapa took the lower mirror. Their reflections shifted. Sakyamuni's mirror  reflected the image of Maha Kasyapa, while Maha Kasyapa's mirror reflected  the image of Sakyamuni. This is the mutual embodiment of buddhas. Having  completed the above, next they performed the kasaya robe ritual, raising their 

304 WILLIA M BODIFOR D  

heads. Sakyamuni rubbed Maha Kasyapa's forehead and said: "Just as these two  mirrors function together, so too is the Lineage of the Wisdom Eye that Per ceives the True Dharma bequeathed. Throughout the infinite future this lineage  must never be allowed to terminate." These are the words that are chanted  buddha to buddha.  

Then the image in one of the mirrors shifted to reflect the name of Sakya muni. Likewise, Maha Kasyapa's name appeared reflected in the other mirror.  They performed the rite of mixing blood from their tongues to form ink and,  using a wooden stylus, linked the two names together. The dharma transmis sion ceremony of past buddha to present buddha is performed thus. Do not  allow it to become lost to buddhas of future generations. Buddhas and bodhi sattvas have halos of light or purple clouds around their heads because they  perform this ceremony.  

In the same manner as when the Buddha spent twenty years in Heaven of  the Thirty-three Deities (trayastrimsa) preaching the Maha Maya Scripture to  his mother, the huge audience of eighty thousand addressed the Buddha and  asked: "According to the scriptures, this is the dharma of equality. But what  about the blind people of the triple world? How can they be saved? Please by  your compassion provide them with a means of salvation." In response, the  Buddha preached the Ten Vajra Precepts.  

The appearing in the mirror, the placing it on one's head, the appearing of  Sakyamuni's name, the linking together names of past buddhas and present  buddhas, the ink from the blood of the tongue, the sprinkling of sanctified  water on one another's heads, the transmitting the flame of the flaming chicken  with its spots in nine places, the lighting of the torch: these constitute the  dharma transmission ceremony of all buddhas. They are the life root of the  buddhas.  

The Wayfaring Site [bodhi-manda, or site of awakening] of Sakyamuni and  Maha Kasyapa became a stupa. It is the appearance of the Transmission Re turning Stupa. The bodhisattvas, auditors (s'ravakas), and solitary buddhas  (pratyekabuddhas) gathered around it like clouds. The king of Magadha and  his sixty thousand attendants came to that assembly of equality. The earth and  heavens shook with six kinds of earthquakes. The demon of the Sixth Heaven  tried to disrupt the Buddha by throwing rocks to smash the stupa. But at that  moment many additional stupas began to appear. They were too numerous to  count. As soon as rocks were thrown by the demon they appeared as letters  and fell from the sky. The many stupas appeared and the letters became at 

tached to their back gates. Within ten years they spread throughout central  India. As Master Tendai said, from there to this Vimalakirti-like abbot's quar ters [that is, the room in a Zen monastery where the initiation is conducted],  thus has the dharma been transmitted. This buddha-to-buddha lineage must  never be allowed to terminate.  

Later generations must never doubt this Emptiness and Dust Ritual. Deviation  from this format is the heresy of naturalism (tennen gedo, that is, denial of  karmic connections). This document was originally written in an Indic script. 

EMPTINES S AND DUS T 305  

After a long time the Indic letters became corrupted. During later generations  this document required special study of Sanskrit and the proper procedure  began to disappear. During the time of Ejo, the second ancestor of Eiheiji, this  version was drafted. The original text is inscribed on Chinese paper and is  stored inside the heart of the sacred image of Dogen, the founder of Eiheiji. It  is never revealed.  

("True Dharma" is the ancient mirror. "Lineage of the Wisdom Eye" is the  blood from the tongue. "Nirvana," which is complete Parinirvana, is liberation  from the cycle of birth and death. The "Marvelous Mind" is the flaming chicken,  which is the shining flame of the torches. "Entrust" is shared use.)  

[Lineage continued from above:] . . . - Ananda - Sanavasa - Upagupta - Dhrtaka - Miccaka - Vasumitra - Buddhanandi - Buddhamitra - Parsva - Punyayasas - Asvakhosa - Kapimala - Nagarjuna - Kanadeva - Rahulata - Sanghanandi - Gayasata - Kumaralabdha - Sayanta - Vasubandhu - Manor hita - Haklenayasas - Simha - Basiasita - Punyamitra - Prajnatara - Bodhi dharma - Second Ancestor Huiko - Third Ancestor Sengcan - Fourth Ances tor Daoxin - Fifth Ancestor Hongren - Sixth Ancestor Huineng - Qingyuan  Xingsi - Shitou Xiqian - Yaoshan Weiyan - Yunyan Tansheng - Tongshan Li angjie - Yunju Daoying - Tongan Daopi - Daoan Guanzhi - Liangshan Yuan guan - Taiyang Jingyuan - Tousi Yijing - Furong Daokai - Danxia Sichun - Changlu Qingliao - Tiandong Zongjue - Xuedou Zhijian - Tiandong Rujing  

- Eihei Dogen - Eihei Ejo - Daijo Gikai - Tokoku Jokin - Sojijoseki - Yo taku Jakurei - Jigen Tenshin - Kido Choo - Sesso Ichijun - Tenso Soin - Kokoku Genshin - Ekkei Rin'eki - Chikuo Reishu - Dairin Meifu - Sekigan  Eikaku - Tenno Ryoin - Daiko Zen'yu - Tsusan-rin - Buddhas and ancestors  properly penetrate - buddha bodhi - . . . . [This line extends up the left margin  of the text back through the circle to Sakyamuni.]  

Rub the disciple's forehead and say: "This ceremony shall be taught orally in  verse. But it must be performed according to the Emptiness and Dust Ritual. If  the Emptiness and Dust Ritual document is not transmitted, it is a heretical  lineage."  

- First year of the Great Song-dynasty Baoqing Period [1225]; ninth moon,  eighteenth day: Rujing, the former abbot of Jingde Zen monastery on Mount  Tiantong bequeathed the above document to Dogen in accordance with proper  ceremony. The attendant Zuyue offered incense. The guest prefect Zongrui and  the attendant Guangping performed obeisance. This Song-dynasty style precept  ceremony was propagated during the Baoqing Period.  

- Fifth year of the Japanese Shoo Period [1292], eighth moon, thirteenth day:  the above document was carefully copied from the original stored in the Myo kodo Memorial Hall at Eiheiji monastery. 

306 WILLIA M BODIFOR D  

- Fourteenth year of the Japanese Kan'ei Period [1637], junior fire year of the  ox, eighth moon, auspicious day by Kyugai Donryo.  

The Unsurpassed Ultimate Blood Lineage  

of the Bodhisattva Precepts in the Orthodox Transmission  of the Buddhas and Ancestors  

What is the blood lineage? The blood lineages of all previous buddhas and  ancestors as well as the blood lineages of all deluded, ignorant living beings  fundamentally are not two. They constitute the undifferentiated true body of  a single flavor. Because the buddhas and ancestors have awakened, they con 

stitute original awakening like the moon shining bright in a cloudless sky.  Because ordinary people are deluded, they experience darkness as if the moon light is obscured by clouds. When ordinary people of deluded minds receive  the bodhisattva precepts all filth and obstructions are eliminated, completely  allowing this spiritual luminosity to appear for the first time. For this reason  the Brahma Net Scripture states: "Living beings who receive ordination with  the precepts enter into the ranks of the buddhas, attaining the same great  awakening. Truly they are the Buddha's children." Based on this principle, the  person receiving the precepts sits in the Dharma Throne in the Wayfaring Site,  and the teacher bestowing the precepts bows to him. This ritual signifies the  attainment of the Way, as the fundamental Buddha [the teacher] descends and  the manifest trace [the disciple] ascends. Then the disciple bows to the teacher.  This ritual signifies the attainment of the Way, as the fundamental ascends and  the manifest trace descends. The preceptor bestows and the disciple receives.  The teacher hands over the blood lineage chart and the disciple humbly grasps  hold. This ritual signifies the attainment of the Way, as the fundamental and  the manifest trace together descend. Once the lineage has been bestowed,  teacher and disciple leave the Wayfaring Site together. This ritual signifies the  attainment of the Way, as the fundamental and the manifest trace together  ascend.  

The round circle drawn at the head of the blood lineage chart signifies the  bright moon disk that constitutes the fundamental mind of living beings. It is  called the "blood lineage." Therefore, the blood line that links together the  upper and lower names signifies the undifferentiated body of teacher and dis 

ciple. A five-colored string is used to tie these two together, because living  beings are inherently endowed with the marvelous virtues of the Five Wisdom  Buddhas of the Womb Mandala. Ascending without knowledge of this prin ciple, they become stained with the mud of the five defilements (klesas). Be cause the seed of the Five Wisdom Buddhas is thereby concealed, in ascending  they defy the five planets, in descending they defy the five mountains, in be tween they defy the five constant ethical norms. Day and night, dawn and dusk,  they accumulate the karmic conditions of their evil actions. Therefore they 

EMPTINES S AND DUST 307  

defy the spiritual standards of the three jewels of Buddha, Dharma, and Sahgha  and of the local gods. Nonetheless, by cultivating the courageous vigor of spir itual practice one purifies his six sense organs, and at the moment one receives  the Vajra Jewel Precepts of the buddhas and ancestors he suddenly eliminates  the five defilements and realizes the fundamentally awakened body of the Five  Wisdom Buddhas. Although each of the five colors has a different name, they  are neither different nor distinct from the awakened body. This is why a five colored string is used to tie these together.  

Blood-lineage charts are rolled up and bound with nine knots. This indicates  that the eighty-four thousand dharanis [spells] and the eighty-four thousand  defiled practices, the good and the evil, ultimately are not two. True and false  are one and the same. All return to the perfect dharma body of the nine types  of consciousness. The nine knots express this.  

The Chinese graph for the word "union" (go) is used to state the doctrine  of all nine types of consciousness being perfectly endowed. When the ways of  host and guest achieve union, all insignificant matters, petty humans, and non sentient things end up in the coal pit. This one Chinese character is composed  of three graphic elements: "man," "one," and "mouth." This means that man  uses his mouth to eat things to sustain his life. Union with this blood lineage  thus sustains the life of the buddhas and ancestors. Buddhas use their one  mouth to preach the unsurpassed dharma wheel to save all beings of great and  small, real and provisional spiritual capacities. Zen uses the one mouth to pluck  out the stakes hammered in by monks. In such ways, is there any affair of day  or night, secular or sacred, that is not accomplished with the mouth? Other  extensive ways of examining the graph "union" also exist and should be handed  down.  

This tradition was first transmitted when Dogen, our country's first ancestor,  traveled to Song-dynasty China in accordance with the instructions of Eisai,  the founder of Kenninji monastery, and entered into the innermost chambers  of Master Tiandong Rujing, thereby completing his studies. Wanting to return  to our country, Dogen humbly requested leave. Master Rujing replied: "Don't  be so hasty. There exists this document called The Unsurpassed Ultimate Affair  of the Buddhas and Ancestors. It is rare. I have not yet permitted you to learn  it. At this time you must keep this a deeply held secret. After you receive it,  take it back to Japan and use it to benefit all beings." Dogen obeyed his teacher's  command and remained for another month. After he finished receiving it, he  returned to this land to save all deluded beings, the good and the evil, the elite  and the base.  

What is the great affair of the buddhas and ancestors like? You must guard  this well. Guard it well. You must keep it secret.  

- Copied on a good day, second moon, eighth year of Genwa Period [1622]  by Kyugai Donryo. 
