+++
title = "०१"

+++
SAY 

100 

1. May the rays of the moon of wisdom (consoious ness) which have come out of the mouth of Paramose (siva) and which are capable of destroying the enemies or tho Ultimate Reality (Parama siva) prova 11. 

2, 3, 4 & 5. The Great sagos, Sanatkumara) Sanaka, Sanatana, Sanandana, Nerada, Agastya, Sanvarte and Vasista etc., inspired by the power of Siva, dos ir ing to learn tho great faot (the ultimate Reality) and much pleased, said to Kartikeya, who is slayer of Taraka, a demon, and who helps the people, sinking in the ocean of the world to cross it, on worshipping him duly, ngir, we have come to you with a desire to get success in the Yoga. The bare' cannot be achieved without Yoga. Kindly tell us the game.. 

.6, 7. Kartikeya, whose inner soul is much pleased, on salut ing Mahesvara, who is the Lord of Ime, worshipped by Gods and giver or enjoyments and salvation, said (to the sagos) - please listen to me, I shall tell you Malini Vijayottara wh 10h 18 sprung up from the mouth of Paranosa (Siva). 

8, 9 & 10. Goddega Paravati, after paying galu tation to 31ya, who was sitting in his own place, saia 'You have told me the Siddhayogisvaritantra, consisting of nine crore vorses, which are class 11 led into the three parts. Again you have fully told me the path of yote la Malin vijayottara tantra, which have three eroro vorsee. You have also given me its summary in twelve hundred verses. 

30. 

11, 12. The sune vast (path of Yoga) cannot be grasped by the majority and thousanda or dull-minded . persons. Therefore, O Paranosvará, please tell no, after su ing it up in its oondonsod form so that it may puit! the dull minded people and wing all sorts of muodossos to them. The King of the World, Siva, thus told by tho Goddess, having laughed, said: 

13, 14, "Od svi, please listen to me. I would tell you Malini Vijayottara Tantra, which is not disolos od to anyone uptill now and which contains the theory or siddha Yogiavari Tantra.. 

| I have got this Tantra from Paramatman, who lo Aghora (not dreadful), long ago. Ona should, in reality, know the acceptable and avoidable material (from the Tantra above mentioned). 

15. The acceptable group consisting of the siz prinoiples: Siva, Sakti, Mantramahesvara, Mantra, Mantras vara and Anu (vijnanakala) 1(useful) to the aspirants, who are desirous of the fruits or Sivadva ita and they ought' to accept it. 

16. (There are throa varieties of Inpurity or Malin this Saiva philosophy. They are mentioned in this vors, and are said to be avoidable (Hoya). All these dirts are conneotod with the airrerent moasurora (Pramatra) and stand in the way of the realisation or their true nature as Siva). 

Mala wh loh simply means Anava Lala (related to 1 imited selt, anu) Karna Mala (rolated to Karma, deeds): Mayiya Mala (related to 11lusion, Maya) and all this 11lusive world is said to be avoidable croup. This group should dorinitely be known to be avoidable by sdahakas. 

21. 

17. On knowing the acceptable group and leaving aside the avoidable one, one cen obtain all sorts of success es. Among the zooeptable group Isa, Siva, is all doer, calm Omniscient and lord of all. 

18, 19, 20 & 21. Siva is inmenenent, transcendent and endless. Similarly His Sakti is also of the same kind. He, in the beginning, desiring to create the world, awakens the individual-selves whion are Vidy osvaras (possessing only one dirt). They are eight - Aghora, Paramaaghora, Chorarupa, Ghorgnana, Bhima, Bhisana Vamana and Pirana. Having appointed them, who are the doors of preservation, destruotion, protection and grace, as the Lantresvara and Mantramah esvara, he, like them, oreated soyon orores or Mantras with the dieties residing in them (s mandalas). 

82 & 23. All these great souled mantras are bring ers of all fruits. There are four kinds or Atmen (Limited gelr) (the four kinds are Sakala, Pralayakala, vijnanakala and Mantra). (Out of these four, only two kinds are defined). The vijnanakala has only one Mala named Anava, Pralayakala hus Kerma Mula including the Anava Mala. Thus this Atma has two Malas, viz., Anavu and Karma. (The third lowest and worst form of Atma, 1.e., Sakala, which contain three Malas, has not been mentioned here). Dirt is said to bo neso ionom or ignorance, which is the cause or the need of the world. 

24. The good and the evil deads produce pleasure and pain respectively. In *0cordance with the divine wili, this limited soul (who is sive and who has agowed the form or the limitedselr) has the desire or enjoyment. . 

25. The King of the Mantras (siva), having entered Into His Maya Sakti with all His energies, created the woria 

32. 

for the limiteisalt which desire to get suo0033 in the enjoyment or the universe. 

26. That ode, that is, all-parvading transdond ont al, fountain head of the world, without beginning and end, the Maya Sakti of siva, Isani 1s innune, from any change. 

27. This power of Maya Sakti creatod Kalatattwa from which Purugatattva is born, which (Purugatattva) after getting tho strength or doership, produoed Vidya Tattva, 1.a. impure Vidye, and Raga Tattva (attachmont). 

28. Vidya (1fmitod knowledise) makes the limited selr (who 18 Siva) and distinguishes between the cause and 1ts erroot. The Raga (attachment or inalination), pleases the limited self with the pleasures of the Impure enjoyments. 

29. Niyati (1 irited desire) appoints the indivi dual self to his own work. The Kala derined as the extent or two rincore and a quarter (tuti) presents bororo h the Anu) division of space and place, 

30. From Kalatattva, the Prakrti is formed and from avyakta, the Buddhi, possessing eight qualitiosk 15 oreated and from the Buddhi, consisting or sight Gunas, Ahankara forned. 

. 81. From light (tejas) sind the King of tha sonces has sprung up. From the Valkarika 11ght, the (ton) senses 

are produced. 

From the third kind of light tho Tanmatras 

are born. 

32. Bars, skin, eyes, tongue and nose, these aro five sensod of knowledge. Speech, hands the Anus the Benitals and foot, these five aro tho senges of action. 

- 88. The whole world, from Kala to carth, the son ato., by his own power, are changed by Siva. 

33. 

84. The same siva has orduted the difference of Xala eto., tattvas from the worlds (Bhuvana) for the salco of enjoyers who desire to have suoo eas in their enjoyment. 

85. Thus all the individual souls united with Tattvas beginnings from Kala upto tho end of Dhara Tattve (earth) should be known as "Sakalatman' by those who wish to avoid the state or Tattvas. 

36. All the Souls under the influence or the sakti of Siva, the nature of which is to conceal the whole univer 80 in it, do movements in the world, which has thres States viz. Ejection (srst1) stability (Sthiti) and deatruotion (Samhara). 

87. The Kudrks, who are thumb-sized, have one hundred and sight varieties, owing to their doorship every- .. where in the world. 

38 39. Being kind to Rudras (who oroate the whole universe and assume the form of seven measurers) siva, has openly appoint oi them to tho rank of Mantrasvara. Thao Mantresvaras, having found that the Brahda oto. aro approach 

ing them, sive the fruit equal to their own strength, to three (Brahma ato.) who are desirous of enjoyiaont and aal vation. The Brahma eto. whon themselvos are delivered, deliver seers who again being great personalities, deliver 

Manyantas. 

40. (The sages) say that this is the knowledge of avoidable and aquaptable explained by 31va and is surrioient for the oreated world beginning from the Creator dpwa tho earth. 

41. Threo orores and a halr Mantras appointed by Siva, after being kind to group or Anus, wont to the eternal placa. 

84. 

42. Thus in the nourya of time when the degraded Atman becomes a blo tó be 1dentical with Siva, this Atman 10 

connected with the siva -Sakti whion 18 quito calm and xIves 

liberation. 

43. Some one when linked to Siva Sakti dies while the other gets free from the nosienon with which he is 

united. 

44. Tho Anu und or the possession or Nudra Sakti and desirous of obtaining liberation is taken to a good teacher by the will of siva in order to got enjoyment and salvation. 

45. On worshipping the teacher and getting the initiation of Siva from him who 19 contented, the Anu (Sadhaka) at onoo dias and obtains the state or Siva or enjoys the Slva Yoga and realises Siva altor death. 

46. (The aspirant) on getting the initiation or Yoga should practise it. He gets success in Yoga and eternal place in the end. 

47. The Any when he reaches the highest place in accordance with this syte novor booonee Pasu and stands in the pure consciousness as a part and parool of it. 

48. There are four kinds of Atman which again has . four kinds Sadhaka, Samayi, Putraka and Acarya. The Aoarya among them is said to be puro. 

49. The Preceptor and Sadhaka shoula perform three sorts or deeds 1.a. daily duties, duties related to some cause (Naimittika) and desireless desds (Niskama). The other two Samayi and Putraka should only perform daily 

duties. 

80. The acceptable and avoidable knowledge in 

35. 

horoby explained. It 13 the best of all the knowable things. On knowing this, one gets all sorts of accomplish monts. 
