+++
title = "०५"

+++

1. After this, o Isvari, I shall explain the path of the World8 (Bhuvanad hva), Firgt or al1, comes tho Kolagni Bhuvana, which should be purified with efforts. 

2. All the Bhuvanas, Avici, Kumbh 1paka Bhavana and Raurava, whioh is third in nuber, are undoubtedly purified on the purification of the Kuamanda Bhuvana. 

Hae 

%, 4. Then thero are the seven lower regions under the earth. First or them is Mahatala. The other six ara, Rasatola, Talatala, Sutala, witala, Titala and Talu. If the Bhuvana, Hatak, is purified, these all are purified. 

5. There is the earth, full of seven Islands and seas above them (geron lower regions under earth). Thero is the Sweru the resting place of gods in the Middle or 

the earth. 

8. There is the Bhuvalora & dove it and above the Bhuvaloka, there 13 Svarloka. Thon there are laha Jana, Tapa and Satya. These ara in all seven regions. 

7. There is the fourteontold multitudo or animato and inanimate beings there (in the seven regions). The fourteen kinds of them are as follows:- : 

(1) Innova blo. 

(2) The class or the exponta. 

61. 

(3) A group of the birds. (4) A class of the door. (5) A olass of the Animale. (6) A group of men. (7) A multitude of a friends. (8) A demonioal olags. (9) A class of dami-gods. (10) A class of colestial musician. (11) A alags belonging to Indra. (12) A olas relating to the moon. (13) Aolass rolating to the Prajapati (a god of creation). (14) A group belonging to the Brahman. In the Brahma 

world is purified, all the worlds above cited phould be considerad purified. . 

10. There is my world, 1.6. Valsnava worla above then. If this is purified then undoubtedly everything 18 purified. 

11. Dx O Darling, when these five worlds preceded by Kalagni Bhuvana are 'purified, everything standing in the Maorooo am should be considered purified.... 

12. Above them, there are the worläs or tho hundred Rudrag geparately. The pookor should purify tho ten worlds en compagsed by their leader out of the hundred. 

13, 14 and 15. Ananta is the first or tha. Then there are Kapalisa, Agnirudra, Yana, Wairrte, Bala, .Sigura, Nidhisvara, Sarvavid yad kipa, Soma bhu and Virabadra who has the lustra of smoke and rire. when these alavon are puri riod, all the hundred (Rudras) should be considered pupir 180. Above them, there are tho five groups (or the Rudras ) oon sist ing of eight oach. 

18. (Tae nmeg er to first group oongisting or 

aight Rudras are &iven below: 

Lakulin, Bhara bauti, Dindhi, Asadhl, Puskara, 

Na imisa, Prabhasa and Amarssa. 

17. 18. Teohnically it is regarded ad Patyastaka - (Lit. the group of the sight lords). The other group which is the most aeoret, consists of :- Bhairava, Kedara, Maha kala, Madhyama, Amrat 1kosa, Jalpesa, Srisaila and Har indu. (The third group has the following naness - ) BhInesvara, Mahendra, Attanasa and V imalosvara. 

19, 20, 21, 22. Kanakhala, Nakhala Kruksotra and Gaya. This third group is oalled Quhya (Lit. seoret). Now the fourth group technically termed pavitrartala (1.1t. Puro) which consists or: Sthanu, Svarnaksala, Bhadra, Cokarnaka, Mahakala, Av imuktesa, Rudrakoti and Ambara pada. (The fifth group consists or the following names: stkula, Sthulesvara, Samkukarna, Kalaujara, Mandalesvara Akota, Duranda and Chagaland aka. It is technically termed Sthanvastaka and covers the boundary or ahankara (Prido) Tattva. Please hear about the Devayonlastaka group, which pervades the Buddhi tattva, from me. 

88. Painaoa, Raksasa, Yaksa, Gandharva, Aindra, Sawya, Prafosa and the eighth world is Brama. 

24. and 25. In the Pralrti Tattva, there is found the Yogastaka group which consists of the following worlds: 

Akrta, Krta, Vaibhava, Brahna, Vaisnava, Kamara, . a una and Sraikantha. In the Purusa Tattva, there aro the six worlds the names of which are:- Vana, Bhima, Ugra, Bhava, Igana and Ekaviraka. 

. 86. The worlds:- Pracanda, Vadhava, Aja, Ananta and Ekasiva are found in the Raga tattva. In the Asuaaha 

63. 

Tidya Tattva, there are the words wrodhesa, Canda, Sam varta and Jyoti. 

87. The worlds sura and Panoantaka should be known in the Kala Tattva. The Worlds Ekavira, Sikhand 1 and Srikantha are attached to Kala Tattva. 

and 

er8 

28. 29. In Maye Tattva there are eight worlds, Mahato Mandalesana, Vamadeva, Bhava, Udbhava, Ekap ingeksana, Igana and Bhuvanosvara, whion havo the form of a thumb and which have the lustro like that of a Kalanala (Lit. death fire), 

LIELISULIS 

30. 31. 32. Wige people say that there are five worlds in the Vidya Tattva, names or whioh are, as Halabala Rudra, Krodha, Aunbika Aghora and Vamaderi. In Isvara Tattva the world beginning from the Pivan and end ing in. the 'Aghora' are found. In Sadasiva Tattva thoro aro rive worlds viz. Raudri, Jyesta, Vans, Sakti and Sadasiva, 

33. 34, 35. Thus in brior not in detail, one hundred and eighteen worlds should be known in all the categories. When the purification of all the roads is required, the group of thesa ono hundred and oightoon worlds should be puririod up to Sadasiva and a Sadhaka should unite himself with Siva. Tho Sadhaka wio 1or desirous or on joyment, on concentrating himself on Sadasiva, should practise yoga. Thus the Bhuvanadhva which I 111o, 13 explained (for detail see 7.A. 7th and T.A. VIII). 
