+++
title = "०८"

+++

• 1. After this, I (Siva) shall explain the padri. fice (Yajana) which is the giver of all deixos and by the mere sight of which an aspirant becomes roapooted by the female attendants on 8 iva (Yogini). 

- 

2, s. First of all a beautiful place, full of a globular pool consisting of the measure of twentytivo fingers, surrounded by the half navel from all sides and accompanied by the beautiful 11pa or the fingers and a girdle convering one-fourth of the plac., should be got. made for saor irioo. 

4. After this, the enchanter who has conquered the couple or 'opposite qualities, such as, pleasures and pains, cold and heat ato. having bathed in accordaneo with the sixfola bhava snana (Lit. ldea bath) as munerated above according to the order or bhasma snana. 

5. The Bhasma bath (bath by ashes) is that when the Sadhaka uses the ashes consecrated by Mahastra llantra in ascending order that is, from feet to head. 

6. Arter Mala-bath, the aspirant shoula emear hig head and other parts of his body, that is, ho ought to touch the various parts of his body from head to feet by reciting the rive Vidya Mantras. Then he should bathe in water consisting of six parts. 

7. Then, he, without putting on clothes, should wash h18 hands and feet. He, on sipping wator, whoula; oprinkle the body with conscoreted water by the resitation of Parapara Mantra, which contains many lottero and Padde. 

1 

8. On doing the general Nyaza and explatory rito with the Mantre or Apara, tho Sadhaka whould pregont (in 

74. 

sacrificial ground) with the Mantre of Malini and repeat the Mantra or Pera Sakti, which is (sauh). 

9. In watery bath also, (tho Sadhaka) should amear his body with olay, consecrated by Astra Mantra for the sake of Mala Snana (Olay bath). 

10, 11. Here Vidhi bath eto. should be done with water as it is already mentioned. Ir a man who chants : Mantra, is bathed in accordance with the general method of the bath, he should sprinkle water consecrated by the mantra of the three Vidyas, on his head for the sako of Mantra bath. Thus he should perform the Vayavya bath, which 

1.s done by the dust by the cowa. 

. 12, 13. The Sadhaka muttering the Mahastra Mantra, should 'attentively go seven places then he should rotura, on remembering the Parapara Sakti. The divine vyavya bath is also similar and is performed in rains as well as in sun shine. (Both of the baths have very little airforenco). In divine Vayavya bath the Sadhaka should cono entrate his 

mind on Para Sakti from, whioh Ambrosie is oozing. 

14. The Sadhaka, on raising sono of the fire, should burn his body from the thub of his right foot by astra Mantra. After doing this, he should moiston his body with water by the Mantra or Para Sakti, which is in the form of Aubrosia, i de 

15. The aspirant who lo puro and free from all worries, first of all, on uttering the Mantra of the sun, should enter the house of the gaoririce which is purified by astra mantra. 

18. He, after worshipping the porters (avarapala) should throw the flower, conseorated by the Hahastra Lantra 

75. 

attentively for the pacification of the burning (dreadful) obstructions. 

17. After doing this, the Sadhaka, on protecting the then a freotions with the utterance of tho Lahastra. Mantra, should enter the house or tho saoririoo whion is full of fire hurriedly (Vannivat, lit. like firo techni- cally speed 11y). 

- 

18. The Sadhaka who is in the position or a pupil, whose face is smiling and is eastward, first of all,should begin a partioular nyasa with the astramantra the lustre of which is like Kala agni. 

... 19, 20. He should think his body, from tho thumb or feet, burnt internally and externally.. Artor meditate ing on the ashes of his body which the Kavaca mantra, he should meditate on his individual soul which is just like Siva vindu (Guru). He (Guru) who is not defcatod, should infuse power into him (pupil) that he is I. In other words the pupil is not dirterent from the teacher. 

21, 22, 23. Ó Parvati, tusn the Sadhaka should ooncentrate (bis mind) on the vidya Murti (a neno of tho diety pervading Mantra itself with the following Mantrar 

The 'Mahaprana' represents an aspirated sound (H) The word "dandarudha" represents 'R'. Nabhi” means "Ksa. The words 'Nitamba, Vanestane, Kantha, Vama Simara and. Vama Mudra represent M, L. V, Y and NU respectively. 

84. (This group of nins lotters) decorated by Nada Sakti and Vindu the other names of which aro Vindu (Dot) and Ardna Candra (crescent moon) respeotivoly, is well-known as a good lump' (pindavara) which, o Devi, conta ing nine lotters (Navatamaka). 

... 

76. 

25, 28. This Mantra with its ina al meaning which it represents, 18 said to be giver of all suocode'. 

The other form of this Mantra 13 as follows: < 

. 

I 

From this Mantra (above mentioned) 1r tho thres first letters are removed and six dirferent vowels are added to this remaining group of the letters, the Mantra will re present the six parts of the body beginning from the heart, owing to the combination of the dirforont vowele. 

First of all, the mouths of the Vidya Burti Mantra heginning from the upward mouth otc. by the letters Ks. Y, R. V and L full of vowels should be prepared. 

After this, the aspirant should place other letters viz.A, A eto, on forehead and the other parts of tho body in order to make limbs or the Vidyamurti Mantra for the sake or success (in tha Kriya Yoga). 

27. A and a should be placed on tho torchoad and the mouth respectively. I and I und U mhould be placed on the right eye, the left eye, the right car and the left ear respectively. 

28. R, R, LY, Lr, E, ai, o' and au should be placed on the two nostrils both sides or the throat, the upper and lower teeth, the upper and lower lipo respectively. 

29, 30. Tho letters - am and Viqarga (aspiration) 

should be placed on the look of hair or the central part of the head (Sikha) and tongue respectively on the right shoulder, right arn, fingers and nails of the right hand the letters of the first group that is Kavarca, whilo cho letters of the second group (Cavarga) oooupy the loft : shoulder, left arm, finger and na 110 of the loft hand. The letters or the tavarga and tavarge should be placca 

on the right and left legs, both thighs and other parts of the body. 

31. The letters of the Pavargo should to placed on both sides bally and heart respectively. Tho lettors of the Yavarga (Ya, Ra, La, Va) should be placed on the skin, blood, flesh and the intestines, respectively. 

82. The letters Sa, Sa, Sa, Ha and Isa should be placed on the bones, fats, semen, heart (Prena) and the roots of hair of the body (Romakupa). Arter making the 

who is wise, should invito Lord Siva.. 

138. The Lord Prana' (Vital forca) Wabhi (Havel) represents two letters Ħ and Ks. The word Daka ina Karang ull' (the fingers of the right hand) and left car represent Gha. and U with whom all tho letto18 montioned by the above cited limbs are combined, the following Biva Mantra would be prepared which is siva hinsol? and in the giver of all sucosas... 

34. The abovo montioned Mantra 13 tho bsst POWER of Bhairava (Siva) who is great souled. The posts or the body of (Siva) should be made of this Mantra, with tho addition of the various vowela mentioned proviously. 

85. There are six kinds of Wyaga 1.0. Lurt1 Dyaga, a srstinyasa Tritattva Nyasa, Astamurtayanganyama, Sivanyosa and Sivanyanyasa. 

36, 37. Please listen to me O Parvati now ono , should do the saktanyesa. On placing the Parapera Balcki. - on its image and Malini Balti on its mouth (the aspirant) should place para, parapara and apara on the look or indir on the central part of the head (s ilha) Heart and richt 

78. 

foot respectively. The same Para oto. thrco palct io, ghould be placed on Bralma Randhra, throat (Kantha) heart, Navel, Private Organ, thighs and left root respeotively. • 

88. After placing the eight fold group or Aghori eto. Saktis and five limbs of the Vidya Widyanga) as before (the Sadhaka) should invite the Sakti who is saluted 

by all Sages (Yogi). 

SOS 

39. 40. The word 'jiva. Prana Kalanala the other name or whion i. 'Samadyuti' and 'Vana Pada reprosent S.A.R and Ph respectively. The word 'Atid ipta* points out that the above oited words should be accompanied by long vowels and a dot (A vindu on their head). The word 

Daksajanu' means 'E' which should also be accompanied by a dot. The Mantra (Thus preparea) 18 full of all tho Matrka Sakti. When the Sadhaka tries to please then by their Mantras they give him wiatover he dogiroa. 

41. The Mantra is said to be the best form of all the Matrka Saktis. The eaghantar of Mantras (Ventri) who 

desires the best suocegs should meditata on this Lantra. 

42. The Rudra Sakti is always unifica with this Mantra. Because it is a para sakti and therefore, it is explained by this kind. 

43. All the sidhis described in the Tantra can be got by this Para Sakti. As it is already nentions, the Sad haka should make the parts or its body by the addition or the various vowels.. 

44. 45. These aro vir kinds of Yanala (L90. twin) 

Tho naneo 

Nyasa which is woll known for all the sighis. or these Nyasau are ag und or- - 

(1) Savaktra Murti Nyaga.79. 

(2) Suvaktra Sakt1 Nyaga. (3) Paradiv idya Traya Nyasa. (4) Aghori-Adyaetaka Nyaca. (5) Vid yangapancaka Nyasa. (6) Sanga Para Sakti Nyasa. 

*** STORE 

46. Those who want to be liberated and aro do sirous of fruits should do the left method (Vana Viani) by following the letters and Mantras collectively or soparatoly. 

47. This rive-fold Nyasa shoula be dono in all kind 8, denoting Siva, Sakti and Anu (individual). 

48. (This riverola Nyaga montioned in connection with Siva and Sakti) is said to be of six kinds if the sternal parts of it (Tlvefold nyasa) is inoluded in it. In this case (when the exterior part is inolued) the Nyasa is said to be or six kinds. 

na 

. 

. 

40. The wise people, keeping in view that such and such a thing is suitable to their saorificial and etc taking, suoh and such a material is proper and improper, should gather all the sacrifioial material with orrorto. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

50. Then the Sadhaka should hold a gqoriricial pot (argha Patra) full or useful material, moo Pron In 

. 

proper things, purified by Astra Mantra and Pia, puro, 

. 

moistened by water and unified with Sakti. 

51. Ir the purirication or something other than the material is needed in any sort of Yoga, ons should do the same with this method. 

* 52. No impuro material ghould bo ugcd in this saoririce. An impure thing becomes pure, 11 it 19 purifica by the water of the sacrifioial pot. 

55. The water should bo pouroa into tho seor171 cial pot with the airold Nyasa. Then the Sadhala whoul purify the whole material with the neotar." 

54. On worshipping the individual sel? (Atnan), one should make, in one's soul, tho form which I shall toll you, O you worshipped by a greater awnbar of Yogis. 

55. In the beginning, the following four torms, 1.6., Dhara Sureda, Pota and Kanda should be mado 2 tho first centre (Adhara Sakti or muladhara Cakra) situated four fingers below the navel (Nabhi). 

one 

OUT 

56. The four forma should be made in tho space of one fingor. .on the four forns a stick containing the alzo of a tube, the religious name of which is (Ananda wala) should be made. On the upper corner of the stiak Danda) the form of the Amalaka tree should be propered. 

57, 58, 59. On the upper portion of the Sula. (whioh is termed Danda') upto the Palate (Talu, Lambika), there is a gland (granthi) o laha Devi. . Without breaking this ocean of Nots, no man is unified with siva. No enchanter of Mantras (the Mantri) should nod3tuto on the Dharma (religion) Inowledge (Jnana) non-attaomont (Vairagya) and prosparity (Algvarya) on the four directions beginning from the Agneyi eto. Besides, he should also cono entrate his mind on the body of the above mentioned rour subjecte on the remaining four ma in directions viz. Zast, Woei ato. 

60. On the upper part of tho giana ana bolov tho Trisula Denda, there should be a thoroughfara (datuakita) which 18 oalled a Vlayatattva rull of three ghics 1.0. forehead (Lalata) the place between two eyes browa (bbu madhya) and the central part of head (bralmazandhra). 

61. Tho wise Sadhaka should med itate on Isvara Tattva, which is lotus-sized and contains three skies (Kakha tattva) situated between the three skies and the palate (Lambika). 

62. The Sadhaka should place and do the Nyasa' or the ninefold group of Sakt is with their Vija Mantras situa ted on the first petal of the lotus which 1. blooming and full of Karn ika and Kosara. 

63. 84. The names of Sakt is belonging to the nine fold group are as given below: 

Vama, Jyeata, Raudri, Kali, Para, Kala Vikarani, Valavikarani, Valapramathini and Sarva bhuta Damani. 

In the middle part of the lotus in the path of the a un Manonmani should be placed. 

85, 66, 67. The other ninofold group of the Vibhu sto., should be plaood on the lotus in the reverso order on the last petal and not on the first petal (as the first petal is already occupied by the other group mentioned in the 62nd verse of this Adhikara. Therefore this group should be placed on the baok part of the lotus) The names of the group are as under :- Ylbhu, Jnani, blya, ioona, Jvalini, rama, Jyesta and Roudri, and all or tha have tho lustre or Kalagni. 

Those forms of the Sakti. previously mentioned as Brahma Vianu and Hara stand ing in the middle part of the pollen of the leaves of the lotus, should be considered as lords or the oiroles. They should be concentrated upon with the names Arka (representing Viana) Indra (rapro. 

ing Brakma) and Vanni (representing Hara), 

82. 

68, 69. On the lotus one should meditate on the smiling Isvara, full of knowledge, quite calm 11ko a deud body, containing the body of orores or Kalagni (highly effulgent) and the seat of all the wordly phenonenon. 

The Sadhaka should concentrate his mind on the peaks of the Sakti Sula whioh has come out of 118 (Isvara's) Navel the length of which is upto Brahma Randhra, begun with the three skies. 

70. The aspirant should meditate on the three white lotuses of the Sakti, which are all pervading and which have their place upon the posks of Isvara. 

71. The Sadhaka should conoentrate his mind on Vidya Murti (Vidya Tattva whion represents the Sakti), the Atma Tattya (which represents the 'Nari! individual soul) and Siva Tattve (the Supreme Prinoiplo) already plao ed on the peaks of the lotus. 

72. The pupil who 18 in the form of a Sadhaka should think of the Para Sakti in the middle part of the south and the North on the three peaks. Morsovar, ho should also concentrate his mind on the Parapara dukti or red colour and possessing great strength. 

73. The Parapara Sakti, on which a Sadhaka is advised to concentrate, is slightly dreadful but not dangerous. The Apara Sakti which is dangerous and con tains black and brown colour should be consantrated upon on the left peak of the lotus. 

74. Th. Sadhaka should always keep in view the Para Sakti, representing will power (iocha Sakti), des 

troyer of the dirrioulties and tormenta of those who come 

to it for their shelter, pleasing and which is in possess ion or crors of the souda. 

83. 

76. 76. One should speoulate on the rive parts of the vidya in the sixtold image of the Sakti and arter this, in the sub-directions, Agneya, Ishana, na irrta, vayu and the Daksine, the parts of Sakti and Siva whoula be placed respectively end ponder over them with the toon nical method or the scripture of Salvism. 

. 

. 

77. The aspirant should concentrate his mind on the Aghora eto. the group of the eight Sivas, accompanied by the eightfold group of the Aghori oto. by the repetition of the astra Mantra - in the direction of the Indra and other gods. In the middle of the direction the game groups should be mei 1tated on by the 'looana. Mantra. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

78. One should begin to repeat the special Mantra of the Lord Siva, arter meditating on the lokapalas (pro tectors of the directions) outaide the lotus with their ovm Mantres. 

. 

. 

. 

79. The Sadhaka, arter identifying himself with the forms of the Pera, Parapara and Apara Sakti, should repeat their Mantras ten times each and meditate on their forms which are like the burning fire. The word "Svana! should be pronouno ed in the end with every Mantra. 

. 

80. The Mentri (vrho is devoted to the repetition of the formules) should recite the word 'Svahe' in the und with every Mantra for the accomplishment or the sacriricial funotion. The Manasa yaga (Internal meditativo suorifice or dedication) is collectively mentioned. 

mad 

81, 82, 83. The other name or this intern.1 meditative dedication or amoririca 1Trisula contain one stick and the thron peaks (Ekadanda and trisaktika). Without the knowledge of this Sakti Sula, o Beautirul one, no body can fly from the surface of the muxth won arter 

. 

- 

84. 

doing the special posture (Khesari Mudra). 

I 

The Trisula consists of the three Sulas (Poak) which technically are s am bhava, Sukta and Anava. The Sambhava Sula is explained. The Sakti Sula is eight 

fingers below from this Sambhava Sula. 

Tha anavashula 

is aga in four fingers below from the sakta Sula. 

One should speculate the cirole of the Sakt is with 

the difrelence of the saoririoe. 

84. 85. After the knowledge of the trisula, the Sadhaka arter sitting on the posture (Khecari Mudra) oan fly from the earth. The food grains purified by the 

Mahastra Mantra twenty one thes, should be thrown on all directions and should be noditated on as the burning rira. on meditatios on the sacrifioial houses, which is devoid of all the restrictions, the food grains should be taken to the Isana direction. 

88. Then the wise Sadhaka should bemoar the Ponoa Gvya whion contains the five substanoos or a cow, with the rive faces of the Lord Siva. The rive subutano es of a cow are: - Urine, Dung, Mulk, Curd and Ghee 

87. The Sadhaka should purity the Pancagavya, full of Kusa gragg and water with 'Sudanga! Mantra in. dowulwald order, i.e., fron Ghee, Ourd, milk, dung and urine. Having seated himself ir the posture of Dravya and amrta', ha ghould concentrate on the prinoipal tattva. 

88. A very amall portion of the Panomgavya should be sprinkled on the earth and tho rest of it should bø placed on the other side. With the recitution or the Malini Mantre, the Vastuyaga should be performed. 

89. The Sadhaka, hay ung rilled his hands with 

85. 

flowers, with recitations of the letter 'Pha' eto. and 

after meditating on the path (Adhvan) from the earth tattva to Sakti, ghould throw the flowers in the end or the letter 'Na'. 

en 

*90, 91. He should worship the Ganapati (son of Una and Mahoga) by giving him soented paste (Gandha) and scent (Dhupa). After plan ing him on the sixfold seat with word 'aum' he should worship the Ganesa who is the Lord of all obstructions, with the paste of the Sandal wood and 

nt by the reoitation of the Mantra "Gam... The parts or the 'Can Mantra should be formed with the addition of the six long vowels, viz. A. I, U, R1 ai and au. 

SC 

92. The Sadhaka, who 1o desirous or success, should meditate on him wło appears with three eyes in his luce und has the mouth of an alephant and a form of a dwarf. Aftor sending him baok, he should worship the mahaptra muntru. 

93, 94, 95, 96. Flaving offered the sirfold seat symbolising eternity (Ananta) roligion (Dharna) konowledge (jnana) dispassion (Vairagya), power of doing everything (Aishvarya) and the altar (Karpika) to the Bhairavu and after meditating on him who poss08868 sword, olub, large tooth, highly terrifio form, face, full of frowns, six limbs made of His own sir letters, beautified by the epithet. 'Phat', eight energies and who appears #drsadful, the Sudhaka ahould think Him or His own form and worship the eight. Matrkas. He should remember the Indrani Sakti with thunderbolt on the eastern leaf (or the lotus). 

97. 98. The wise man should meditato on the Agneyi, 

full of apour or lanoo yamaya with a strol in her hand airyti 

with & word, Varunanl with a net, Vayavi with a flag, 

86. 

Fauveri with a hammer and Iwani with a trident. 

99. All these abova oited Sakt is should be wor shipped with offerings of the sandal wood and flowers. The aspirant should perform the suor irico (Homa) or Bhairava. First of all, a pot consecrated by Mantras repeated a thou sand times, should be placed (in the sacrificial house) 

100. After doing one thousand utterances of the Siva Mantra, tho Sadhaka should do Hona with the orferings 

(Ahuti) or one hundred and eight and then purnahuti. After these funotions, he should be in his saor if 1os. 

101, 102, 103. First of all, a pot made of gold or olay, without any hole, containing all gems or jowold and med 101nal plants (sarvausudhi) 10 it, should be f111ed up with the paste of Sandalwood and water. Then, it, ! having the leaves of a mango tree in its mouth. Putting a garland and a white or red thread in its throat, bearing a mark (T1laka) whion is the killer of demons (Raksoghna), covered by two white clothes, consagrated by the utterande of a Mantra repeated one hundred and sight times and wor shipped by the Sula Mantra, should be placed. The other Pot (The toohnical name of whioh 1. Vardhani) should also be of the same kind, but it should be worshipped with the 

Astramantra. 

104. To the two Kalasas (Pots) that is Mantra Kalaga and Bha Irava-Kalasa, the wise Sadhaka, artar glying the seat already mentioned, should worship, tha Indra oto gods in their own directions with the scattered portion (vikira) by the recitation of the Vantras and vowels... 

105. He, than, should make the continuous flow of water with Bhairava Kalesa and otraulat. it all round with tho following words to the body of the worlar 

106. O Indra, you, with the permission of Siva, should be alort on your own direction in order to avort the obstructions till this saoririoial function comes to an end. 

107. The Sadhaka should place the pot (Mantra Kalasa) which has assumed the image of the diety pervading the Mantre (Murti Bhutam), on the seat in the East. To 1t& South, he should place the other pot (Vardhani). 

. 108. 109. The lower of the Mantras, that is, the teacher, having placed both of the pots, t111 the end or the worship of the Lord Bhairava who is the image of the individual self (Atma Murt 1), should worship, on the Vardhani, a seat of the Creator, on the globe made of the pasto or thre Sandalwood, the group or six, three or one. 

110. Digging up of a Kunda la place just like a pool to onkindle the fire for the saoririoo), ito maraton ing pounding, and its smearing with water or oxorement of a cow (Gomaya) should be made. A durable way (akasa vat) should be made on the four ways of the Kunda and it should be as hard as a thunderbolt 18. 

111. The seored grass, Kusa, should be spread all round the Kunda and the seats made of it should be plao ed on its surroundings by the recitation of the Astra Mantra. Then the Sadhaka should do the Anganyaga with the Mantra "Vid yam Om Frim.. 

112. *Om Sivam should be written in the Kunda. The Sadhaka after worshipping his teacher, should bring the fire in a pot of copper or olay. 

113. Consider ing the fir, as the Banan of Siva, abaking it three timos, the Sadhaka should throw it into the Kunda which is the womb of Vidya (vidyayon 1). Then 

89. 

five offerings of the oblation should be given to the ri by the recitation of the vidyanga wantra. 

114. The birth ceremony and others are complete ir this runotion is performed in them. The Sadhaka, on remembering the Parapara Sakti, should make a full offer 

oľ oblation (purnahut 1) to the riro: 

115. The Sadhaka, having worshipped the other and the fathar (siva) of the fire, should discharge it and should take some portion of the fire from the Kunda for the preparation of the daru (Saaririoial oblation). 

118. Some portion (0iti-gathering hoap) or the burning rire should be drawn from the Kumda with the left broath, that is with Puraka vayu. Arter touching boart with it (portion or the fire) it should be thrown into the 

fire with the right breath. 

117. As it is already said, the Sadhaka should make a full offer or oblation to the rire. It is another method or Sivagni. After seeing the rira as tho rorm or Siva, the Sadhaka should make himselr as his inner solr is. 

118. Tho knower or the Mantres (teacher), on mak ing himself the inner part of 3iva, should do Homa. The root (mula) of the fire, whioh is 'Ram', should be satis llad with the utterance of a Mantara hundred times while 1te parts with the recitation or a Mantara six tuss.. 

119. The satisfaction of the othex Mantrax should be done with the utterance or a Mantra ton t mes. Than *the pupils who are pure, bathed and tasting should be allowed to enter. 

180. The teacher, having saluted Iord Siva, who89. 

18 residing in the four, that is, in the fire, the baori fional material, the Sadhaka who is going to be initiated, and the preceptor (Acarya), should give the pandagavya (five substanoes of a cow) Daru (maorifloial oblation) and brushing stick (Danta Dhavana) to the pupil. 

121. The Caru is made of the paoririqlal milk and the unhusking rioo. Then it should be concearated by a 'Firduya! Mantra. The piece of a stiok used as a brush and divided into six parts with the utterance of a Mantra seven times, should be thrown. 

122. In the presence of sivagni, teacher, pup 11, Bhairava Kalasa and Mantra Kalasa, the piece of a stiok or the milking trees which aro four, used as a brush, should be given to the pupil to be thrown (on all directions): 

123. If the piece of the stiok used as a brush) falls in the east, north, Isana, west and upward direotion, It should be considered auspioious, otherwige lnauspicious. In its irauspicious fall, one hundred and eight offerings or litution should be made into the fire (Asta Satika Hona ). 

124. Then the teacher should do the external duties in all the directions. He should offer the obilation with the repetition of the Mantra "Om Ksah sarva bhutabhyah Svaha". 

125. After sipping a little water (Ao smann), do 

ing Anganyasa and saluting Lord Siva, the Sadhaka, who la pure, ahould begin to do his work in his house as he is 

directed by his preceptor. 

128. The teacher, after doing his special angan yaga and that of the pupils and performing the daily auties 

in the morning, should think over the dream. 

90. 

127. 128. 129. Ir thu drosim 1s auspicious, he should tell it. If it is inauspioious, he should porrorn & saoririce (Homa). (If he sees) flowers, fruits, women dressed with olothes and ornaments, overcoming the Gala mities, ascending good places, drinking, cutting or the head, eating of the un baked meat, apparent preooption of the Gods - and anointing of the body with exorsment, he will get the required success. 

130. If the above mentionsd marks are not found in a dream, then it is termed a bad dream and in which eating of the cooked meet, massage and falling into pits etc. are seen. 

131.. A bad dream oan be made a good one after doing the expiation mentioned in the Tantra Sastra. The wiseman (for the purpose) should do the worship or Gods, fire, teacher and Goddess. 

132. The Sadhaka (under initiation) should not eat anything first without giving it to the Gods, rire, teacher and the Goddess. He should not enjoy but leave aside the property of Gods, teacher, and Durga Devi (Oandi, Lit. Angry). 

133. The knower or the Mantras should not wander to and fro uselessly for a moment. Ho ought to be busy in the practice of Yoga and Mantras. . . 

184. 135. The teacher should read out the above mentioned conventional praoticos (amayan) to the pup11 and then discharge the Bhairava. The teacher and the taught should bathe in the wator of Siva Kalasa which is a destroyer of all the sins. 

This initiation or the conventional.praotices (8 amayiki Dikaa) has thus beca, la brief, explained. 

91. 