+++
title = "०९"

+++

1. When a teacher initiates the pupil*, who have undertaken the conventional practioes, he, on saking them bathe, should prepare a pasa mendala. 

2. Then he should spread a thread on the cast gust from the Middle of the thread, he should mark the East and the West aide equally... 

3. Then he should mark the north and the south side by a thread whose measurement should be the same, wh loh 18 already used for marking the eastern and western a irostions. 

4. A throad whioh is spread towards the south and the north should be thrown in the Middle of the fish. Then he should, from the middle of the directions, mark the space equal to the half measure of the space already fixed (Abh imata). 

8. Similarly, as it is done in the a trections, doso end ing and adoand ing orders, the thread, should be thrown in the directions in order to wako the four oorne 

6. First of all, the space or four hands shou be marked in two parts. Then the space equal to the s of half the hand should be left on all sides, that is, Kast North and South. 

7. The remaining portion should be divided 11 the space of the three fingers. Above the Kostaka (ra of the three fingers' space, and on the sides, the Ko81, of sixteen fingers' space whould be made. 

8, 9, 10, 11. Again, on leaving two portions th fouth, north, Brahman's two 18. md the side of ti 

08. 

ind ividual self on the East, a couple of the crescent moon containing the half space should be made. In the end of the two Khand edus, in the third portion on the sides, south and north, a wise man should make two Khandendus taoing to wards the inner sido in the place of the lvatman. By the side of these two mandandus, the third couple of tho; Khand en dus, point ing to the vital parts (Warna) or the body, : facing towards the outer side should be nade, Similarly, in the place of the Brahman, two Khand andus covering the 

hall and halr space should be mado, 

12. Then, in the end of the second portion on the two sides of the Brahma, two lines tao ing the East and containing the portion equal to the three portions, should be made by wigo men. 

13. In order to make a peak in the middle part, 

two threads connected with the front parts of the thread 

of the Brahman, and reaching one corner of the Khand endu, 

should be placed. 

14. A thread from the side of the Jivatman cover ing the middle part of the two sides, should be placed on the apacs from the oorner of the 1st and the end. Khandendu to the other oorner. 

'16. In order to show a second paak, a thread, similarly, should be plased on the space from tho Sivat man's two sides and the corner of the first Ihand endu. 

16. In the other hall of the Mandala, antiok whose measurement is of two hands and whose five parts aro hidden, should be made. The rive parts of the atiek should be covered by the fiv. Pithas. 

17. The remaining portion or the stick having 

10 

the measur. of one part whould be visible on aosount cl breadth. Below the Danda. (utiok), an Amalaki contain the breadth and length of six and four parte respeotivi should be made. 

18. 19. Below the Amalaki, Its roots of four fingers and its sharp front should be made. The four doors of the first Mandala on four sides should be made. The length and the breadth of each door should be one har and halr rospaotively. On the outer side the door shoul be made double. Please listen to the Padma (lotus) whiol is to be mad. there. . 

. 20. The sight threads ciroular in form and having the measur. or one part, numbering four, should bọ placed in this direction. These are called sixteen thrsads or 

Jiva. 

21. In the Middle part of the two, the same number of threads, that is sixteen, should be placed. From among these threads, the third number of the threads should be like that of tho Jiva on the two sides. 

AN 

22, 23, 24, 25. On doing upto this, the fiva should be brought there. On fixing up the attachinont with the objeot, the Quru, for showing the front parts of the leaves, should make three Kesaras on each laar. Similarly the three paaks should be made or Sixteen ringars. Then the Guru (Mantrin) should worship the lotus by various colours, such as white, red, black, yellow and partioularly graen. The parts of the Karnika, root, m10816 and the front should be worshipped by yellow colour. 

26. The group of th. Kosaras should be white, red and yellow. The leaves with their covers should be of. white colour. 

27. The tour corners, a bit outside like the half Karnika, should be of yollow colour. The place from the fire (Agni Kunda) upto the foot of the Vendala, should be or white, red, yellow and blaok oolour. 

88. The peaks and the general Mandala should be made of four and three colours, respectively. The Danda ghould be or blue and red colour. The colour of the Amalaki should be yellow. 

29. The Sula which is already made, on leaving four fingerg' space of it, towards the East from the back door, should be of red colour. 

30. Tho door with various marks should contain, four corners, or otroular size or narrow size. It should appear as a city, two oit les or three gities separately or oollectively. 

31. The Mandala should be marked by various forms of Sula and throats, wonderful forms and dolidate houses, made or creapers. 

DOC 

32. When it is made, 1t should be purified by a oloth, besmeared with the paste of Sandal wood. Then t 3edhaka should bathe according to the method already 

mentioned. 

33. 34. As before, the Guru Mantrin), on enter ing tho Mandala and on doing the fiva fold Nyage or Bhairava, should do the Nyaga or Navatmaka Mantra, Bha stava Sad bhava and Rati dekhara on the northern, middle and the southern peaks, respectively. 

55. (The formation of the Rati Sekhara Mantra is as rollows:) The Rakta (blood ) Tvak (skin) Manga (Flesh) and Sutra (Artery) teohnically mean the letters, Ya, Ba, 

95. 

la and Va. These letters should be combined by the loft ear (Technically 'U). An Anusvara (a dot) on the forma the Rati Sekhara Mantra, whioh runs as under:- Yuw Rua Lum vum (see Ma 8th Adhi. Ve 81). 

38. The wiss Guru, on doing the Sakt1-Nyasa, which is already mentioned, should do the Tarpana (satisfaction). Ee, on worshipping 8iva, should utter the following prayer: 

• 

• 

37.0: God, you have appointed me as a Guru, you should be kind to these pupils, who are inspired by the Sakti of Siva. 

• • 

• 

• 

88, 39. Be kind to them, who, being in their natural form, have come to you. Please enter into my body 80 that I, being 11ke you, may do good to them. Thus the Guru whose eyes aro pleasod, should think the body of the pupils oooupied by the sixtold rond (Sadadhvan). 

• • 

40, 41, 42. The Guru should think Siva by whom five functions guch as projection sto. are going to be performed. His form, which 18 or two kinds, that is, Para and apara owing to Saktis, follow me in its dual and non-dual shape. His Mantrag, suoh as, Hrdaya Mantra, eto. necome instruments whon a Sadhaka desires to approachHim. He should meditate on siva, fully identifying himself with Aim. On being fully absorbed into Siva, ho should utter the sound, 'Siva ten times. 

43. On uttoring the Mantrag mentioned in the Garbhavarana, thrio., the Guru should put on the white turban and utter the Navatnaka, Mantra Soren times. 

44. He should make a hand of siva, which is the outtor or nots (Pasas). The hand should be washed by the water full of the paste of the Sandal wood. . 

96. 

45. The Guru besmeared with the pasto of the Sandal wood, should worship Siva, who 18 accompanied by nis other parts and who is not to be seated. He should out, outoh and unite his sell. 

46. He should separate the Pasay and alevate his gelr. He should obtain through the phenomenal show of tho universe, the Sivahood or Lordship. 

47. Though separate from Siva, he should think hirself possessing the qualities whion Siva has, I am in the Mandala and I am witness in these performanoes. 

48. I am standing in saoririos and in the fire upto the end of the saoririo, I am in the saor irioial post in order to avert the obstructions. 

49. I am stand ing in the body of the pupil with a view to out his pasas. I am in stand ing in my body and I am door of all aots of kindness. 

. 

50. The Guru, on doing all this abova usntioned, should pay attention to the body of the pup 11 (Sodhya ad hvan) which he desires to initiate. 

51. He should think that overything is in his body. Thus he can attain a high place. Being not different from the body of the pupil, he should think as 

under: 

58. I am the supreme Prinoiple. The whole universe is in me. I an porvader and door of all the things. 

88. A man, identioal with Siva is waia to be '11berated'. Having thought thus, he should again follow the pupil. 

34. He should think the oneness of the pupil, Mandala and the firo. Then he should do the Nyawa or the body of the pup 11 as it is already described. 

55, 56. He should med itata on the Mantras with their own pervasion. Then, he, having tied a cage of nets in the arms, throat and Sikha by a threefold thread and having called the tattvas by their mantras, shoula saori fice to the fire and do its tarpana (satisfaction). 

67. The wise Quru should med itato on the Sakti which is cause and tho pervader of the pupils upto the Mayaadhva. He should mod itato on the Vidya Sakti when the pup11s are purified and they have entered on the pure road (Suddha adhya). 

58. On doing the tarpana or the Vidya Sakti, he should beat the pupil by Astra Mantra. The Quruahould Tout' him in his heart by the hand of siva. 

59, 80, 81. He should catch him and think that he is not different from that ray (or Siva). On going to him through the way or artery, on uttering the Ehedaya Mantra with the epithet 'Ham and making him stand in his own real golf, he should meditate on the womb forin of the Carbha dhana. The Guru should perform all action related to the en lur yo and the birth. O dood eyed one, by the Mantra of". Parapara Vidya oonsisting of the three and halt letters, creating the ongoyer, and enjoyable and stand ing in the richt paak. 

68. The wise Quru should orrar rirtoon suor171 olal oblations to the fire by the Mantras of Pivana, Sakti, astra Mantra and Para Mantra. 

63, 64, 68. Tho wise Guru whould out tho rotters 

08. 

of the pup 11 by the Apara Mantra. On calling the thuwa nead end Tattvese, he should pray to them. Wt 0: Bhuvangsa, go ordered by Siva, you should not stand in the way of the Sodhoke whose materialx self is.coing to be pur iriud and who is going to the place free from diseases. By the recitation of the Parapara Vidya Mantra (Adhyustavarna ya) the cut portion should be thrown. 

66. As the mantras have not yet fully pervado the Sadhaka for the sake of purification of the separate roada, the three separate saoririoial oblations should be offered to the fire after med itating on them separately. 

67. He should orrer 'Purnahuti! by the Para Mantra 

accompanied by the epithet Vaugat in the end. On raising the pupil, he should make him stand in his own solr and in his own body. 

88. The wise Guru, after offering Purnahuti, should give thre, saor iriolal oblations to the fire by Nahapasu pata' and 'Astra' mantras in order to purify the pupil from the feet to head (vilomad ivisuddhaye). 

89. After sending the sakti and Tattvesa, 0: Para mesvari, the Guru should bow red itata on the pure Tattva, which is pervading the impure one. 

70. when the thumb of the foot is purified, having out the net or the arm and mixed it with the Choc, should be offered to the fire. 

71. When the Maya Tattva is purified, the Pasa of the throat should be offered to the fire. This wethod should be adopted for all the initiations meant for the tattvas beginning from the earth to Maya. 

78. The wiso guru #hould apply the para Sakti09. 

and Apara Mantra for the initiutions for which no Mantra is mentioned. When the purification or Tattres from Suddha Vidya to Sadasiva 1s required, the Sakti should be utilized. 

.73. None of the eight Saktis should be used after the Isvara stage is got. Similarly a wise guru should not use S1x Angas after the Seda giya is reached. 

74. Whatever is said, according to the seriptures to tkm be done for the Niskala (Trango endent) Siva, should be done by the Para Mantra.. When the Tattvac upto Sada Siva are purified, the wise Guru should out the Sikha and 

offer it to the fire. 

75. Arter offering Ghee to the fire, he should make the pup 11 bathe accordingly. On sipping some water and worshipping Slva, he should fill the srube with Ghae. * 

76, 77, 78, 79. Having made the pup11 stand in his real self, the Guru should utter the main Mantra. The preceptor int using onenege into the Siva, Suakti his self, pupil, Ghee and fire, should go twelve pades attentively. By Kumbhaka. Pranayama,' he should meditate on the Sakala 

(urmanent) aspoot and Niskala (transcendent) aspect of the Siva and stay there actively till the Ghee is consumed. The Sadhaka who is appointed to roulise the highest Prin ciple, by the Guru. rho has the form of siva, all the bonds or whom, erisen from the Maya, are burnt, does not come again to the animal stage. This method le mentioned in the initiation relating to the Bhuvanadhva. 

80, 81, 82. On leaving aside the method presoribed for the other roads, Slva Yoga and raverso performandos (viloma Karma), this method bring double fruit in tattva and Varna adhva and is more ofrootive. The offoot and 

fruit of this method in the Padadhva in more than that in 

100. 

the previous roads. Tho orrest or it in tho-Mantradhva is more than that in the Padadhya. In Xaladuva its orrool is more than that in the Mantradhva. Its value in the tritattva vidhi is twenty times higher. Thus the puri 

110atlon ou 

on of all the roads is explained in brior. Now listen to the duties of a 8 adhaka and a preosptor which are going to be dogoribed. 