+++
title = "१०"

+++

1. 8. Without examination, the teacher should rix up a man as Sadhaka who has good marks. He is bent on achieving success. He knows soriptures and has self control and firm mind. He is neither greedy nor dull headed. He should worship Siva with a good mathod already prescribed. 

. In the initiation of being a preseptor (Acaryo Diksa) as it is already oited, a pot or gold or olay, with out any hole, attached to the southern petal or the middle lotus flower, should be placed. 

4. The teacher should woyahip tho xantrag of the Rudras such as Indra, Kuvara, Varuna oto. with flowars and the other things. After satisfying the Kalapa (Pot) with the utterance of a Mantra, one thousand times, the teacher should begin the Abhiseka (Sprinkling water on the body) of the pupil who 18 going to be an Acarya (Prapoptor). 

5, 6, 7. On senting the pup 11 who faoing alike the east and the north, who has bathed and is decorated with flowers and garlands, etc. ou a good and auspio ious seat, made of lotus flower or wood, the teacher who has made his being of the Mantras, who has perforatud auspicious ceremonios fully, having done the Abhisska or his pupil with the kingly meatu ac wall 

e 

101. 

shell Kettl.-drums and recitation of the prayer Mantruw or the Vedas and having thought him just like 8 lva, should adorn him. 

8. Again, the wise teacher, who has got flowers, un broken grains of paddy and seed or the sagaxs plant in his hand , on worshipping Siva, should give the Mantra of Siva to the pupil (under the initiation of being a preceptor) and then he (Quru) should do the Nyasa or Siya with water. 

9. The teacher, relying on Siva (daks in amurt 1), 

having sprinkled water on the head of the pup 11, should express Rudra Sakti in him with the Astra Mantra. 

LET 

10. The pupil, on being embrassd by the Rudra Sakti, should do the Tarpana (Satisfaction) of the Rudra Sakti Mantra with the utterance of the Mantra thousand times. From this time he will got his place in the Rudra Sakti or would be unified with it and will hava the quall ties equal to it. 

11. This is the Abhisaka of the Acarya and has no Mantra prescribed for it. The rank he has got, in his final a bode. 

18. Tho Sadhaka, having got the place which is inediossible to the sinnor, should do the observance of the Mantra (Vantra Trata) for achieving success in the Mantra (Mantra Sastra).. .. 

18. On doing this, as it is said in the Abhisoka, and bathing, the Sadhaka should repeat the vidyadhipa Mantra ono' lakh and do its tarpana (satisfaotion) ten times. 

14. As it is already went ioned, The Sadhaka, on doing the Abhiseka, keeping in view the Mantra and baing 

102. 

wholly absorbed in that, should rapeat the 'Brahma S iras' Mantra two lakhs without slaokness. ! 

15. He should utter the 'Rudrani' Mantra y two iakh times, Purustuta. Mantra rour lalch times and Maha Pasu Pata' Mandtra rive lakh t fuas o Goddess. 

16. The Sadhaka or 'the 'vidyadhipa. Bra hvaa sirag. "Budra' 'Purustuta' and 'Hahapasupata' Mantra, should put on the clothes and ornaments of white, rad, yellow, black and various colours respectively. Tho Sadhaka protected by these Mantras booomes incomparable, 

17. 18. The Sadhaka, strengthened by the splend - our or the Mantra should not be spoken to by all the inners. After doing this fasting, the Sadhaka should orter the 'Argha' (Oblation of various ingredients) to the diety which he wants to accomplish and repeat its Mantra nine lakh times. 

Then he should do its Homa (saoririoo) with tho best paori 

rioial Materials and its Tarpana (uatisfaction) tea times. 

19. Those who know the beat say that weat, and the leaves of the Palasa tros aro the best qualities to be saoririced as an oblation. The double quantity of these materials is termed as Middle quality. The threefold quantity of the same materials would be termed as the worst quality'. 

80. The Gheo, Guggulu and fats of the human body are said to be like meat. The ourd, Vulva, milk and lotus are like Kama' (earth). 

21. Amalaka, Durva, amta and righ are just 11ka the Ghee. . Or the sacrifice (qua) should be done with sesame in the place of noat, Kawa and fish in the ninetola aixfold and throatola quantity respectively. 

- 

108. 

22. First of all, on doing this, the wine Sadhaka should offer an oblation of various ingredients consisting or Durva and water etc., for the sake or suceus. Ho should continue the repetition of the Mantra wil he gats the success he desires. 

28. one lakh or Jepas or the Mantra brings a king with his servants, army and convoyanga under the influence of the Sadhaka. A Sadhaka by two lakh of Japa, will get the kingdom of the king o Dovi. 

84. By the three, four,rive and six lakh of the Japa tho Sadhaka gets success in achieging the treasure, army, the whole earth and the great nur ber or the celestial damsols of the Gandharvas (a olasa of singars in heaven) 

respectively. 

85. By the soven lakh of the Japa, tho savon regions of the earth come under the control of the Sadhaka. By ten lakh, he becomes just like the Loka Palas. By rirty lakh, he subdues the principles from the earth to the prakrti O Mahosvari. 

26. By the sixty lakh of the Japa, tho principles from Purusa to Maya come under the influence or tha 340 haka. By eighty lakh of the Japa, he eo quires the Su. Vidya and Isvara Tattva. By one Karor or Japas, he has mastery over the principles from the earth to Sada Siva Tattva. 

27. On doing as prosor ibad, tha Sadhaka beoones 

firn-minded and fearless, this proces should be done at 

the night of the Krigna Paksa (Blaok fortnight). 

28. Having done the saeririco, already wentioned and thon having offered the saaririoial material as an oblation, the Sadhaka, who 10 standing firmly with the 

the raco' towards north, whould repeat tho Vantra. 

29. He should continue his japa t111 th remalo attendant on Siva (Yogini) on making a decadrul, righton ing and indistinctive noise, come from all sidos. 

30. 31. Yoginis (16male attendants on 8iva) on falling on the ground and surrounding the master of Sadhaka, stay there. The Sadhaka, having saluted then, waaking any loft parts of his body and giving them an ofror of the blood, sprung out of it, becomes equal to them. The preceptor also should do, this vidhi aur ing six months, silently. 

32. The Sadhaka who sacrifices an oblation to the fire thr.. times a day, on doing the Nyasa already mention ed, should repeat the ton or the liva mantras which I (Biva) 

0 

0 

have told you (Parvati) already. 

33. The Sadhaka with celibaoy, on porrorviug. sacrifice, already oited, full of the threw Saktis (Para Parapara, Apara) should msditate on the Triwula Vantra. 

34. The preceptor should sprinkle water over him selr in the beginning as well as in the ond. On doing this praction, a Mantri would be the best of all the kaow ers of the Mantras. 

SOY 

35, 36, 37. A Sadhuka of this kind, doing acts cruel or kind, has no sin (and is authorised to do all sorts of works whether good or bad). The puriried Sadhaka as well as the preceptor should do the Nyasa or the three parta of the body, 1.e. tha thub of the right foot, heart and 81kha with tha thro. Mantras of Apara, Parapara and Para. The Nyasa of the Palm of thá thub of the left foot,. eyes and fora fingers should be done with the Astra Mantra.' 

105. 

. 

. 

. 

Aksa ir 1 by this opithst, the Matrka Sakti should be sot antared into the body of the Sadhake or pre aoptor as the caso may be. 

. 

. 

. 

The wise Sadhaka, by the apitust "Na Pua Hri* should get the Malini Sakti eatured which is tho image or the gakti. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

The Mal 101 Nyasa should be done in accordanca with the applioation of the opposite postures which mean from foot to head. 

The comenon Nyasa is that in which the parts of the body are touoned on their own proper places. 
