+++
title = "१२"

+++
TWELETH A DHIKARA. 

1. 2. On hearing the very luoi sposoh or Wahadova and galuting the killer of the demon Andhaka, Parvati, whose eyes are abloom with pleasure, who gives pleasure to the world, pleased with contentment in the form of a brosia and worshipped by a great number of gods, said the following 

WO 

DIT 

words: 

ES 

3. O Destroyer of Tripura, you have already said that the Yogi should practise Yoga. How shoula Yoga be performed? Pleage tell me. 

4. Thus told by the holder of the universo, (Parvati), Bhairava (siva), who is broad-minded and destroyer of fear, spoke to Parvati this pleasing and 

deep word. 

8.0: Goddess, please listen to the method of Yoga, whioh is going to be explained by me and by the firmness of which a Yog 1 will obtain success.. 

6. The Yogi should practise the Yoga Tadav 

112. 

or in a peaceful underground house, which is charming and 1s free from all obstruotions. 

7. 8. The lord or Yogins, Pirmly sitting on the seat, who has controlled his mind, breath, scagog, sleep, anger and mental disturbanoss and who is free from all mental arri lotions, whould accomplish a uocess in the prin ciples, from earth to Sakti, in accordance with tha Laksya bheda and Ek Cittabheda (explained in the 13th and 14th verse of this Adhikara. 

9. The Laksya Bheda which is properly going to be explained, has six kinds, which are Vyoma (Lit. sky),"; Vigraha (Lit. body), Vindu (Lit. drop), Arna (letter), the Bhuvana (the worla) and Dhvani (sound). 

10. The kinds or "Vyoma' are three, external, internal and external-internal. The Bindu 18 tonfold. 

11. The one Bindu whioh is just like the stars and which has the form of a Kadamba flowar and a globo, is said to be of ten kinds, with only the dirtsrano in colours. 

12. The sound, with the kinds of Cinoani" and "Ciravaka" eto. is of ten kinda. The Vigraha, though 'or two kinds - 1.6., igraha and Sthanco', has many kinds. 

13. 14. The worlds ara inauerable and the number ol the letters is rirty. Laksyabheda 1s that when a Sadhaka meditating upon ons aim gots other inoidental 

fruits, algo, Citta bhoda 19 that when a Sadhaka raaditatag on one mark and obtains only one fruit. 

18 MAT 

15. The pup11, puriried by saoririon and initiation | and ordered and advised by the Guru, desirous or estting any thing accomplished, should practise Yoga in the 

118. 

beginning. 

16. The application or Khaaari Posture, i..., sitting in that posture, in the reversa order, the Sadhaka, on doing the Anganyasa of the hands with the pa should mad 1tate on the Sakti. 

17. 18. Hə, on controlling his breath and Inwardly galut ing the diety, should rem em ber the Paravija shining from feet to forehead like the burning fira and illmining with its ow form, and meditate on the three Matras (or para) come out of the Palate (Ka), the place between two eyes brows (kha), and forehead (ga). 

19. The Yogin, even though he be a killar of Brahmana, gets the unification (with Sakti) within ana hundred noises made by clapping of hands together in a. week (1.e. in a short time). He should praotisa this Yoga da ily. 

20. 21. One, who has been thus uniried with the Sakti, should follow the method mentioned above. The ono for whom the teacher has done the wathod of unirlcation, should begin the control over the Dhunika in socordato with the impressions or the acts done in the previous birth, 

after salut ing Ganesa and remem baring the tradition or the guru, Parama guru and Parenesti Guru. 

88. Ħo, thinking himself wiried with the sakt1, should med itate attentively on his own body appearing als gold, consisting of four covers and marked by the thunder bolt. 

23. After the seventh day, the Sadhaka body becomes inactive and dull (jada) and in twenty-seven days " it assumos heavines, 

- 

112. 

or in a peaceful underground house, which is charning and is free from all obstruotions. 

7. 8. The lord of Yogine, firmly sitting on the seat, who has controlled his mind, breathi, consag, sleep, anger and mental disturbances and who is free from all mental arrllotions, should accomplish suocess in the prin ciples, from earth to Sakti, in accordance with tha Laksya bheda and El Cittabheda (explained in the 13th and 14th verse of this Adhikara. 

40 

9. The Laksya Bheda which is properly going to be explained, has six kinds, whion are Vyoma (Lit. sky), Vigraha (Lit. body), Vindu (Lit. drop), Arna (letter), the Bhuvana (the world) and Dhvani (sound). 

10. The kinds of 'Vyoma' are three, external, internal and external-internal. The Bindu 13 tenfold. 

11. The one Bindu whion is just like the stars and which has the form or a Kadamba flower and a globo, is said to be or ten kinds, with only the dirtoronoo in 

colours. 

12. The sound, with the kinds or "Cinoaniw and "Ciravaka" eto. is of ten kinds. The Vigraha, though'or two kinds - 1.e., Vigraha and Sthancu, has many kinds. 

13. 14. The worlds are innmera bio and tho nubar or the letters is firty Laksyabhoda la that witon a Sadhaka meditating upon ons a im gets other incidental fruits, algo. Cittabheda is that when a Sadhaka meditates on one mark and obtains only one fruit. 

18. The pupil, puriried wy saoririco and initiation and ordered and advised by the Guru, dasirouw or getting any thing accomplished , should praotise Yoga in tho 

118. 

beginning. 

18. The application or Khesari Posture, 1.0.,... sitting in that posture, in the roverdo ordor, the Sadhaka, on doing the Anganyasa of the hands with the para wantra should meditate on the sakti. 

17. 18. He, on controlling his breath and fxwardly galut ing the diety, should remember the Parkvija shining from feet to forehead like the burning fire and illwining with its own form, and meditate on the thres Matras (or para) octe out of the Palate (Ka), the placa batween two eyes brows (kha), and forehead (ga). 

19. The Yogin, even though he be a killer or Brahmang, gets the unification (with Sakti) within ona hundred noises made by clapping of hands together in a week (1.e. in a short time). He should praotiso "this Yoga daily. 

20. 21. One, who has been thus uniried with the Sakti, should follow the method meat icnet.atove. Tuo buo for whom the teacher has done the mothod of unification, should begin the control over the 'Bhumika® in qooxdato a with the impressions of the sotu done in the previous birth, after salut ing Ganega and remembering the tradition of the guru, Parama guru and Parenesti Guru. 

88. He, thinking hirzelr wiried with tho Salci, should meditate attentively on his own body appearing en gold, consisting of four covers and marked by the thunder bolt. 

23. After the seventh day, the Sadhaka Lody becomes inaotive and dull (gads) and in twenty-ovon days it agaunes heaviness, 

24. With the praotice or the six months, the Sadhaka wins over all his desires and Shines 11kw tho molten gold. With the practice of the three years, the Sadnaka possesses the strength or a youg olophant and becomes as firm in a body as a thunderbolt. . 

.25. This pure earthly concentration or the wind (Parthivi Dharana) has been desor ibed by me to you anong the pirteenfold kind of the earth tattva already mentioned, o Goddess. 

26. In the second kind, Tho Sadhaka should wodi tate on his own body, whioh 18 aotivo appearing au moltan gold and seated in a otrole decorated with tha thunderbolt and consisting of four corners. 

SET 

27. 28. Arter one weak, the Sadhaka becomes heavy and after a month, he is free from desires. After siz months, as a matter of fact, he knows everything on earth. In three years, he enjoys the earth or which sovca goas are girdle. This is the second kind. Now listen to the third kind. 

29. He should med itato on his own body as it is ddsor ibed in the second kind. But in the third kind, the body should be aotionless, while in the second kind body is active. He enjoys the fruits or the earth, mentioned in the 

geod 

geoond kind, inolud ing the fruit or tha Patala. 

80, 31, 32, 33. In tho fourth kind, tho alot Sadhaka should med itate on the diety residing in hin, 002 ta in ing the length of twelve fingers, and active with the form or the first letter 'a'. Having got all the fruits, already mentioned, the Sadhaka becomes a Lord or the Patala, one of the seven regions. In the fifth kind, tho ho fruit is stablo but the state of oonoontration 1.5 tranqu1 

115. 

and the colour of the substance to be med idated on, is yellow like the shining sun. In the sixth kind, vory. thing is as in the firth kind, except that the colour of the thing to be concentrated on, is black and appears to be anveloped in olouds. 

hur" 

In the seventh kind, the wise Badhala, wiono body and mind are quite calm, should think the form for the diety) free from the waves of the sacred wora),Z'Bhuwah and 'svah'. He comes to know all the worlds and enjoys them for as many years as are already mentioned. 

34. 35. The wise Sadhaka should meditate on his own 1 im 1ted solr (atman) stand ing in the interior or tho heart, whioh is Sada Siva (Sakala), appearing 11ks gold and which has 11lumined the whole body with its lustro. Its fruit is the knowledge and enjoyment of seven regions. The difference between the eighth and the ninth kind is that the substanse to be med itatod on in the eighth kind 1s waving and active wh1le in the ninth it is notionlesa and calm. 

38. The Sadhaka should, according to Nirvikalpa Semadhi, cono entrate on his physical body appearing as.. 

yellow as the orbit of the sun. 

The Sadhaka, 20cording 

to the way already mentioned, resides in Brahmaloka. 

37. The Sadhaka should think toth, the diety and his body, full of yollow colour, shining downward. TUD Sadhaka after being equal to mo (Biva), concu to wy region. 

38. He should meditata on the light, which is 

externally and internally yellow and whioh 121inates the whole universe. Ho obtains the Lordship of the Rudras. 

59. Thus the Yogin, in order to accomplish uuooess 

116. 

in Yoga and to enjoy the various fruits or the universe, should practise this riftoon-Told earth principio. 

40. The wise teacher, in the time or iuitiation, should appoint the Sadhakas to the same category, whioh, they, according to the impression or the deeds done in the previous 'birth, deserve. 

41. The man who does not return from the princi ple to which he 18 appointed, having enjoyed its fruits and being identioal with giva, is llbarated in the end. 

42. Even the man who does not deserve to bo" initiated, gets himself puriried by the lord of the world because on burning the nets or the world and being purified, he assumos the state of 3lva. 

a use 
