+++
title = "१३"

+++

1. After this, I (siva) shall explain this watery concentration (varuni dharana) with the accomplishuone or guccess in which the Sadhaka boconos a master or wat way regions and substances. 

2. The Sadhaka should nad itato on his body, which is white, cold, ciroular and ataying in the wi801e of the water. He should also think that thero is nothing oxoopt water outside or inside his body. 

3. The body of the Sadhaka who is praotising thus, 

gets wet in a week and he is definitely frea from tho. diseases or bile in a month. 

4. In a year, 11mbs and sight of tho Sadhaka aro amooth and his hair grow blue und our bed. Tu three years, . he rains like olouds. 

B. This first pure varuni conotatration is thus117. 

explained. 

Now I shall explain the dharana with its kinds. 

6. The Sadhake with the mind '18 entical with tho Jela tattva (watery prinoiple) au deuoribod borotv. should med itata on his body, which is active, white and staying in the water, o Devi. 

7. The Sadhaka gets rid of all the d13eases duo to the bile in a week. He gets firmness in six months ir he is fully identified with the tattva. 

8. In three years, the Sadhaka gets the knowledge of the cover of water. In the motionless kind of this dharana, he is like Varuna (a diety residing in water). 

9. 10. One, who praotloes 'jale tattva gyet aa tioally, knows the realities or Varuna. Ag alrsady mentioned, the Sadhaka meditating on his 1 ir ited self, having the breadth of twelve fingers and staying in tho middle of the throat, seas the everlasting Lord of Jala tattva' (water princinle). His vision becomes quito calm in the fifth kind which is motionless. 

11, 12. When two kinds, viz., Mamtresvåra Prawati 

and the Mantregvara Pramtr Sakti, are firm and steady and the Sadhaka med itates on the clouded dise of the moon, he ags unes a position equal to that of the moon mentioned above. Then the Sad haka should concentrate on the transcending Sakti whioh has filled his body with white light. If the concentration of the Sadhaka's mind is complete and perfect, the form of the diety in the mind of the Sadhaka would be 

permanent. 

13. The Sadhaka, appearing as the disc of the 

moon, who is free from clouds, should med itate on her. 

Ir the mantramahesvara Pramatr Sakti stape is complete, 

11.8. 

he will be the lord or the moon. 

14. He should med itato on the light which is white and which illuminates the whole universe. Thus hu will assume the position of Mantra Mahouvara springing out 

water (jalevaranasambhava). 

15. When the Sadhaka consentrates on tho white 

light, pervading his whole body and gets permanent hold or it, he assumes the lordship of the universal thinga. 

16. When a Sadhaka is steady in the state or awakening (Jagrat), dream (svapna) and dreamless sleep (Susputi), he gets the position equal to the diety, which he meditates on. When two stages 1.e. dream and dreamless gleep aro permanent, the Sadhaka gets the knowledge of the "Isvara tattva". 

17. In the second kind, the knower or Yoga bacomas 

steady and stable and ass un ez a State equal to that or "Isvara tattyan. 

In the Mantra Mahesvara utago, the Sadhaka agbunda the position of the Matramah esvara Promatr. In its second kind he is separated from this position and proududa to. attain sivahoon. 

18. In the fifteenfola kinds of all the principles, this method which gives rive fruits, should be understood by the persons well versed in the art of method. . 

19. The fruit other than this already went iokud is explained and this fruit should be known as an incidental one (Anusangika) without any consideration. 

20. This watery concentration with its rirtoun kinds is explained. Now listen to the dharana or the fire 

119. 

for the supoeg3 or Yogins in the Yoga. 

21. The Sadhaka shoula meditate on his own body which is triangular and holding lines of'the rod llants of fire. He gets sharpness O Devi, within seven days. 

22. The Sadhaka gets rid of ali diseases due to wind and phelgm in a month. Ho becomes sleepless and cats much food. The quantity of excrement and urine becomes little. 

23. In the end of two months, the Sadhaka burns the thing apparently with his own will. He, in threa years, on being oqual to the fire, plays of his own accord as fire 

does. 

24. The Sadhake should meditate on his own in aividual selr ascended on a triangular cirols. Ir & Yog1 (or this state) is angry, he can burn all the forests full 

or mountains. 

. 

. 

. 

25. In all the firteen kindg with thoir two divi sions, active and inaotive (Savyapara, Nirvyapara), within a week a wise Sadhaka is free from a 1964188. Ir ka oonti nues his practices for six months, he will be like the firs. 

C 

. 

. 

. 

. 

26. Within thros years, he sees the rowlity of the whole fiery prino iple (Tejastattva) and whatever he 3030 in such and such tha Pramatr Sakti kind, becomes atublo. 

. 

. 

. 

27. The Sadhaka, as it is mentioned before, med itating on his linited sell appearing like the fire and staying in the middle of the palate, sees all the Lords or 

. 

the Tejas tattva systematically. 

28. The Sadhaka concentrating on his own limited salr, appearing like the fire, whion is accompanied by smoke 

120. 

and having the form just like tho d180 01 the sun in the interior parts of his palato, guts a position equal to that of the Tejas tattvesu. 

29. If he meditates on Sadaa iva, which llau dos troyed the nets of the darkness with its own lustra ana which is appearing like the fire free from smoke in the same palate, he will gat Sadasivahood. 

30. He should meditate there on the light, tho form or whion is like the lustre of the day and rire. Ir he is steady in that forn, he will have the quality or tho 

TIO 

v 

Mantra Pramatr. 

31. There shines the light equal to that of the lump made or Jewola there. If the aspirant is fully absorbed in it, he assumes the position or Mantra Pramatr Mantresvara, pramatr and Mantramahesvara Pramati. 

32. The Sadhaka, meditating on the light which is 

prevailing everywhere, that is, in exterior and interior or 

the body, never falls from the place he attains till disso 

lution and he stays there without any break. 

33. In the time of dissolution, ho attains the perfsct oalm place of Siva. This liory oonoontration with its firteen kinds is explained. 

34. Tho religious applicant following the windy cono entration (vayavi dharana) should meditate on h1s body appearing a s o iroular, marked with dots, moving to and fro and full of the words 'Cu and Cul. 

35. The Sadhaka with the full applicatioa of his mind to this dharana for six months, boconos moving 1110 the wind and all his diseases due to Phelgu aro doutroyed. 

121. 

38. The Sadhaka, even on walking four hundred miloa in a moment, can go further without exhaustion and does not feel tired. In three yours, ho is apparently a holder or the form of the wind. 

37. He can grind a great number of mountains and uproot trees. He, being angry, can bring Indra with his servanta, army and conveyance, under him. 

38. The Sadhaka should mod itate on his body appear ing as a blue collyrium for six months. He gets all the fruits already mentioned undoubtedly. 

39, 40, 41, 42, 43. If the Sadhaka 19 identical with his limited self, he can see the Vayu tattva. If he ooncentrates on his individual solf, appearing as a colly rium, between the eyebrows, he can see all the impur. lords of the Vayu tattva. 

On 

The Sadhake, who appears just like the lotus flower covered by clouds, med itating on his limited aclr which has the form of the disc of the sun, becomes equal to the diso of the sun. When he is absorbed in this for and meditates on Sadasiva, blooming 11ke a lotus flower, he sets the 

position of Mantresvara and Mantrama hesvara. When the Sadhaka concentrates on the light spreading upwards and downwards, pervasive of all and containing the colour of its own kind, he becomes invincible. Thus the divine Dharana of Vayu is explained. 

. 44. The Sadhaka, on meditating on his own body like the wind remember ing the sky, attains to sunyatva within goven days. 

45. By one month's meditation, ho, bitten even by' the lords of the snakes, does not become aenacious and is 

122. 

free from all d 18 eases, winkles and pray hair. 

46. In six months, he has the forma liko that or the sky and can walk through the dolioato holes. In threa and halr years he will be like the sky.. 

. 47. With his own will, he can have a great body and can become subtle bodied of his own 'accord. Ho 18 unable to be broker and to be out. He aces tho earth full of holes. 

. 

43. When a Sadhaka meditates on his own body which has tasted the juice or lotus flowor and which appears like a sky with a rat in it, he attains the knowledge of tho sky within three years. 

49. 50. He gets all the fruits obtainable in a wack and six months oto. When ho applios his wind to his soul, staying in the forehead, and containing twalvo fingura longth, he sees all the lords of the various principles systematioally present before hin. Il no med itatos on his own self, which is like the moon, who is swallowed up by Raghu, he becomes like the moon. 

51. Ir a Sadhaka concentrates on Sada siva, stand ing in the forehead and appearing just like the disc or the moon, he will attain the rank or 'lantrosvara. IP (again) meditates on the Sada Siva whining just like tho light of the moon, he becomes purs and white as the moon. 

52. If a wise Sadhaka meditatos on tho light or Sada s iva, which is spreading dowilwards and 111minutius the outer and the inner parts of the Sai halas body, he will, having got the place or Venticavara and Wantxanaho vara, obtaia incomparable knowledge. 

63. Ir he concentratay on that errulgonos which 

123. 

is spreading onwards and whion is in the form of u nooter, he, on gotting freedom, will fa 11 nowhoro. 

54. Thus the dharanus or the rive elements ar. explained. The fruit of thoso Dharanae in this wone which a Sadhaka stand ing in the pure path, sets. Tha unirioation of Bhuta (Bhuta Samayoga) is also or rive kinds. 

55, 56, 57. A Sadhala concentrating his mind on these attainments of fruits (Phala Prat 1), gets the poisong (which are nothing other than impurities) of his limited self destroyed. On what ever attainment of fruits, he conoon trates his mind with his own will, he attains the fruit. when a Sadhaka, keeping the attainment of fruit in viou, besing his ooncentration of mind on any dharna, ho, owing to so many Dharanas and their incidental fruita, can gat any fruit of any Dharana. He should not stiok to ono Dharana. If he does so, he will not have the best fruit. 

58. When a Sadhaka atta ing Buodous in the pivo dharanas, he can bring the group of sight worlds and the group of five worlds under his control. 

59. A Sadhaka practising systematioally pirtsen staces appealing to him, having accomplished the firot staga in the three years, should accomplish the scooud stegs in two years and the third one (stage) in one year. 

60. 61. He should accomplish the tourth stage in six months, the rifth stage in riva mont ha tho wixth in four months, the seventh in tho threw months, tho oighth two months, the ninth in one month, the tenth in a foxtaight the eleventh in ten days, the twelvth in riva deys, the thirteenth in three days, the fourteenth in two days and the firteenth in one day. 

124. 

This system is reant for those who are dogirous 

of collective fruits (Bamastocohu). Por his who iu desir ous or different fruits, tho sano system which has already been mentioned, is useful. Tho Sadhaka, on en foying buo. 9898, according to his wishes, attains gternal place. 
