+++
title = "१४"

+++
FOURTEENTH ADHIKARA. 

1. After this, I (Siva) shall explain tho aharana of the subtle elements (tannatras), beginning from soont (Gandha) to sound in order to get their fruits. 

2. The Sadhaka should meditate on the yellow Gandha Tanmatra whioh has four corners, the measure or which 18 four fingers, marked with the mark of the thunderbolt and stand ing in the nostr11. 

3. After ton days, the Sadhaka whose mind is not alsswhere, smells a certain perfumo which, though or two kirda, has many kinds. 

4. The form of varying perfunes which yogins. small becomes stable within two months. In aix months a Yogi 

beoomea full of scents. 

. 5. He produoes the perfugo whatever ho likod. Within three years, he gets the douired sudoeso in the five elemants. 

8. After this, he should meditate on the form of his limited sell situated in heart. To gets the knowledge of the cover of the gandha tarmatra within three years. 

7. The Sadhaka conosntrating his mind on the tomu or his limited soul, whioh is full or a littl2 padience and is free from the circle, 1868 all the lords asialug in tha 

over of the boont. 

125. 

8. The Sadhaka meditating on the ind ividual soul which is like the diso mentioned in the earth tattva, bo comes equal to it as before, when the second dhalana iu' complete. 

9. On meditating on the form (of Atman) atanding 

down and 111uminating there, the Sadhaka becomes the lora 

of the form (Svarupa) in accordance with the method already 

montioned. 

10. A bit onwards from this place, the Sadhalaa con centreting his mind on whatever is said to be in the earth tattva and standing in the cover or the perfund, ge #ults of the same kind. 

11. I (siva) shall explain the dharana and juice (R&sa) which is attended upon by the sages and by which Yogins attain all the juices. 

12. The Sadhaka ahoula meditate on the rasa, whioh stands in the front part of the tonguo and or whiloh tho. front part of the tongue is the mainstay, appearing 11ko the bubble on the surface of water. 

13. Being identioal with the 'Rasa, the Sadhala should think the same Rasa consisting of six juiocs. a month, he attains a certain taste or a juice, 

Fam 

14. When the same tagte or tho Juico, on leaving the saline taste and others, badomos sweat, the yogi, swallowing it, overcomes death in six months. 

15. The Sadhaka bacomos free from old age and a igeass. His hair is ever blaok and his appearance 19 6ver lwinous. He, praatining thia (Yoga) cré and on, lives on this carth t111 tho noon, stars and sun continuo. 

126. 

18. Il a Sadhaka appl163 his mind to the form, 

which is like a bubblo and waich is already montioned, ho 

will have the knowledge, thore is no wonder, or the thinga 

outside the cover (Niravaranajuana). 

17. The.Sadhaka, meditating on the same forn (or limited soul), full of radiance and standing without a stand, obtains a residenge in the cover or a juice in years. 

18. The Sadhaka, a bit onwards from this, med i. tating on the disc, ato., already mentioned in the fala 

tattva obtains apparent fruit out of the cover of Rasa, 

B 

which is already cited. 

19. For the sake of success, I shall explain the 

auspicious dherena of rupa Tanmatra, which presonts a beauti 

ful sight. 

20. 21. When a Sadhaka with his olosed eyes in a 300lusion, whatever, like the autumnal cloud, sees he shoula med itate on that substance for ten days. Thus after this 

he vill gee most subtle dots there. 

22. Some of them (dots) aro white. sona red and yellow, while the others are blue. On seolus cheia, ho should devote hinsell to them attentively and thoroughly. 

23. After six montho, ho dess Amorous forms of them. After three years, the same forms sie wight with radiance and become stable. 

24. The Yogin, practising them for two years, 808s them in the form of a dico. Again after ono year, vees then changed into a radianco and after six months again the same are changed into the form of a wall. 

25. 26. After three months, Silo uovu pervadine127. 

light, and after a month, the same light is spread overy where. As time passes, the Sudhaka has the fruit or the oover'of Rupa tanmatra, which is already mentioned, and he assumes a heavenly form. Th19 dharana is not artirioial and is said to be quite real. 

27. Fifteen kinds themselves occur. One should believe in this Dharna. There is no need or the show of the geriptures (Sastradambara). 

28. Now I shall tell you the Dharana or touch (Sparsa tanmatra) by which Yoti can become thunderbolt 

90 

bod iad. 

9999 

29., The Yopi should meditate on his limited soul consisting or the six corners, stand ing in the circle of the heart, appearing like collyrium, rough shining and agitating in every particle. 

30. 31. 32. The Sadhaka, within ten days, Poels the touch of ants in his skin from all sides. He should continue to med itate on the touon. After attaining a body like the thunderbolt, he achieves the fruits already 

mentioned. 

The Sadhaka, meditating on the o iroular rorm.as it is already cited, and getting the Inowledge or the 'Sparsa tanmatra (touob) in its cover, cannot be oneo kod by anybody. He should concentrate his mind on the in dividual self or inferior position with a view to achievo success in being a lord of the limited solr. 

33. 34. By the accomplishment or this puodess, above mentioned, the Sadhaka will be tho knowor or all touches (Sparsas). 

The Sadhake should meditate on the great wound, 

128. 

which he hears carefully by olosing his ears and eyes. Within ten days, his digestive power (Lit. the firo or 

belly) will increase. 

35. 36. Arter six months, ha sota the knowledgs of hearing a sound from a far distance. . However low the tune that a Yogi experiences, in the end of the great sound , should be understood as "Sakala Pramatr' by the praction or which the alert Sadhaka gets the knowledge of the veilor 

sound. 

37. The sound, which is heard in its end like the sound of a conoh shell, should be known as "Pralaya Kala Prematr' and should be praotised in the same form by the 

Sadhaka desirous of that fruit. 

38. If the sound (s prung from it) is greater than that denoting the Pralayakala and covers the other sounds, it 18 vijnanakala Pramatr, o the invincible one. 

39. Ir a voice, fascinating the mind, is heard in its end, it should be known as "Mantra Pramatr by tho Yoxing who are desirous of Yoga. 

40. Ir the sound is heard like that of a calm bell, it is said to be Mantrosa which yields all sidanis. 

41. If the sound heard is like that which conos out in the end or a bell, it is Mantra Maheuvara ana ig a great source of suco 888. 

42. Ir the sound is like the sound whioh @ lute struok by wind yiolds, Yoging should understand that it is 

Siva Pramatr'. 

43. The Sadhaka, who knows all things and depends on the sound which is in its veil, should practiuo all thoda 

189. 

Pramatrg (measurers) soparately (at a tirao) or @yutati oally, he will always have all succees03. 

These rive dharanas of the rive subtlo elonts are explainod. 
