+++
title = "१५"

+++
FIFTEENTH ADHIKARA. 

1. I shall systematically explain 'elovou aharanag of the eleven aens es beginning from *Vagindriya (pecah gense) upto the end of 'Manas! (Hind), in brior. 

2. The Sadhaka should silently concentrate his mind on the form of his limited goul with the utterance or, the words - vaje nenah (Salutation to speech) o Parvati, He can have oontrol over his speech. 

3. Within six months, the Sadhaka can speak svary where without the least obstruction. After a year, he be oomes a knower of all the meanings of the soriptures. 

4. His Speech, adorned with ornaments and poetry, 

proceeds. 

Within three years, he becomes an author or 

Sastras. 

5. 6. The Sad haka, should med Itate on his body, from feet to forehead, whioh 18 white, 111winated by a 11ttle radianoe, full of the diso of the moon and that or the light oxisting in Rasa, in the form of the limited soul. He has systematically the fruits coming out of the vo11 or 



7. On considering his body in the hand, tho Sadhaka meditating on it for six months, can undoubtedly recolva a thing from long distano8. If he continues 1115 roditation for three years, he can get the thing oven from other corner 

or the sea. 

130. 

8.9. The Sadhaka meditating on his Atwan with the body in the form of a lotus flower and praotising all four teen kinds with the two varieties active and inactivo respeotfully, in the hands, undor the instruotion already cited and with the method already mentioned, obtains truits 

which are lying volled in the hand. : 

10. Respectrully mod itating on the sans objcot on his feet, as it is described in hand, for three years, the Jadhaka can warder on tho whole earth upto the sea in a 

moment without weariness. 

11. The Sad haka, on worshipping the fourteen dharanas of his body (as they are explained in the earth tattva) and practising them, obtains the fruits, as already mentioned, coming out of the veil of the root. 

12. The Sadhaka concentrating his mind on the anus (Payu) for one month, gets rid or its diseases. 

13. Continuing this Sadhana for thro0 years, the Sadhaka, though of bad.reputation, gets good fad. It ho practises the fourteen dharanas, which are already cited, he will obtain the same fruit already mentionci. 

14. The Sadhaka with the control or his sensen, should concentrate his mind on the Linca (a malo organ or 

generation) in its own form for six months, ha to power to have things with his own will without any dirrioulty. 

15. When the wise Sadhaka practises tho roulesen dharanas in the 'Linga' he gets the fruits, already olted, arising from its ve 11. 

16. The Yogi should weiitato on his owa tongue the colour of whioh is like that or the moon, for tun deys. He will have the experienow or the tongue like that of his 

151. 

limited solr. 

OOOOOO 

17. 18. Meditating on it attentively for six months, the Sadhaka tantes distant things. Ir ho does this for three years, he will liok tha bost ambroisa . apparently, by which he will beoone free from old age and mortality. He, even attached to the thinga, viloh do not deserve to be drunk, cannot be degraded by Sins. 

19. The Yogi, concentrating on his body oto, as already mentioned, gets undoubtedly the fruite coming out of the veil of tongue. 

20. The Sadhaka concentrating his mind on his nose, which appears like gold, gradually ror ton deys, experiences emptiness of the nose.. 

21. After six months, tho Sadhaka oan smell oven 

the distant thing. 

In smelling a goont, ho can 1111 aman 

who is his enemy. 

22. The Sadhaka (Yogavit), in three years, on smelling beautiful perfume and obtaining trango cndontal gtare, free from old ago and wortality, coves to have a heavenly body. 

23. He, should meditate on whatever 13 alraady 

He obtains fruits of the viol or noso systone 

described. 

tically. 

24. A Yogi, oonoontrating his mind on his own eyes, appearing as a rising sun, for ten days, exparicadas flow of blood from his eyes. 

25. The Sadhaka reels headaolo, o Devi. 

Ho 

should neither foar nor leave orr hic practicos. 

A8. If he lanves orr the practioda ho'vill Logona 

132. 

blind. Therefore, he should continua his praotice, caro fully and he will get heavenly sight within six monthg. 

27. The wine Sadhaka se39 carth full or holso, in the form or a frying pan, very clearly as one would sea the fruit of Emblic myrobalan in hand (karamalakavat) till the polar.ster and even after this. 

28. In three years, the Yogi soas the whole globo and comes to know his body in whioh the female attendante on Siva (Yoginis) rosido. 

29. There is no wonder, ir ho, meditating on his own body, as it is already mentioned, gsts the fruit coming out or the veil or eyes. 

30. For one month, the Yogi, concentrating his mind on his own skin whion 19 free from wavo (motionless) and which 18 lwinous like the partiole or collyrium araty 

where, would not be killcd even by weapong. 

31. 32. 33. A Sadhaka practising this Yoga for six months, cannot be burnt even hy the most horriblo fire. 

The Sadhaka will be free from old age and norta lity and he will not be arriiated by tho thunderbolt, atons or poison, if he praotises this Yoga for three yoara. Ho, practising the fourteen dharanas, will get the fruit of the veil of skin. The kinds of this dharana with its pruit should be known in accordance with the tire already mention ed. But the subject of the meditation here is Sadhala's body covered by his own body ato. 

34. The wiso Sadhaka, meditating on his own car in the form of a sky for six months, can get the power or hearing something from distanco. 

- 

35, O Goddess, the Sadhaka free from old age and doath, hears oloarly all whatever is said in the wholo universe, in three years. 

36. He should meditate on his own body sto., just like that experience in the sky. No obtains the fruita. coming out of the ve 11 of the ear. 

37. I (Siya) shall explain the mental concentrat. 

ion which gives all sorts of successes and by aocomplishment or which a Yogi oan obta in all fruita end Quocauen overy 

where. 

38. The mind of man is the cause or bondago ag well as of liberation. Therefore the praot 1ser or the Mantra, if he desires eternal salvation, should practise to have control over mind. 

39. For one month, the Sadhake, sono entrating himself on his mind standing in his heart with faou down ward and appearing just like the crosoant man, gotu tho radiance of wisdom (1.e. genius). 

40. The Sadhaka, all or gudden, 080p comething and hears wonething else now and then. He, ort and on, has the knowledgo arising from all the dirreront sunog. 

41. After three years, the Yogi has the Laowicăgo of the senses. This knowledge whion he obtaino is very luoid. 

42. The Sadhaka neditating on his body and other on his mind as already mentioned, having got the Truit or the veil or mind, obtains tho qualities of woun-au. 

43. You should praotius all these olova dharanas or the sonses, which are explained, because all the fruito are dependent on the 

154. 

44. The wise people say that these are the bonds and freedom of the senses. If they are attaohod to the world, they bring bondage. If they aro Treo from it, they bring liberation. 

45. When these senses with the mind aro devoted to All pervading (siva), they should be understood ag 

Liberated by the learned people O My darling. 

48. When they are attached to the enjoyments, existing in the dirferent places, they are said to be in de bondage (1.e. tied down). 

47. According to the siddhayogigvari Tantra.. The senses are said to be or two kinds, that is pure and 

impure. 