+++
title = "१६"

+++
SIXTEENTH ADHIKARA. 

1. After this, I (Siva) shall explain the dharana or eroism (garva) which is the best of all dharanas and which brings forth great pride to the Yogins. O Parvati, worshipped by Yoga. 

2. 3. Having thought that 'I am thig', the Sadhaka should meditate on his body consisting or a wheel, mado of sixteen spokes, full or its own aotivitico. In throu years, the Sadhaka becomes invinoible. His personality 18 aternal and is everywhere. 

4. The Yogi, remen bering the navel or that webol and his own, image, should think I am all and overything 

is in me.. 

B. Ir an alert Sad haka, uod itating on iny (8iva.a) form in the whool in heart, gets the knowledge or egoi, there is no wonder at all. 

135. 

6. The Sadhaka, concentrating his wind on the diso eto. of blue and red colour in the wheel obtains the fruits of the ve 11 of egoism and resides in the region or the sun. 

7. He gets everything springing from @goldw and Its ten stages. This Dharana of egoism, whion gives the qualities of the creator, 18 sxplainca.. 

8. 9. The Sadhaka med itating on the lotus, appear. ing just like the diso of the rising sun, full of eight leaves, which surround it, protuberance and Dharma eto. for a month, obtains permanent intelleot. If he continues the concentrations for six months, he will be able to retain whatever he hears. He will be an author or Sastras ir ne continues to moditate for three years. 

10. If he meditates on his own image (in the lotus) he 'will see the buddhi tattva (Intelleot). He, moditating on the creator (in the lotus), obtains the lowl cage or the Lord of Buddhitattval. 

11. The Vedas spring forth from the led itator, whether he is in the waking state or in the stato or Samadhi (Meditative mood). If he continues tho practice of the meditation, and oven without study, thouu wa utable or clear to him. 

12. The Sadhaka, systematically concentrating his mind on the disc and others already mentioned, obtaine supremaoy related to Brahman, which belongs to the voil budani (intellect). 

13. 14. The Sadhaka, applying his mind to the diso of the sun and the oirole of the moon in the wiadlo of his eart, for six months, obtaino heavenly you 

138. 

Ir ha continues this praotico for three yoars, no uohioves success. It he ooncentrates his mind on his body in his heart, he has the knowledge or Gunas (qualities).. i 

SELENA 

15. 16. The Sadhaka, wad itating on his radiant body whion has a form of a viale sonorative organ (Linga), attains the position of the lord of Gunas (qualities). The Yogin, oono entrating his mind on the ten dices on the ten directions, has the fruit of the veil or runas, without doubt. The Gunas are or twenty four kinds each one of which again has firteen kinda. 

17. 18. In brief, the dharanas or the principles beginning from the earth tattva are useful to the Yoging. 91% more Dharanas related to the thirteen kinds aro explain ou for the sake of the Yoging to get succ08s in Yoka., 

19. 20. The Sadhaka should concentrate his mind on nothing except his body havinz its red form (Sverupa) seated on a white lotus and placed on a threefold oirolo. If the meditation of the Yogin is stable within a month there is no wonder, he is free from all diseases. Within six months, he has special knowledge on this earth. 

21. 22. By meditation for » three years, ho is free from old age and others and becomes a peor of Purus a tattva respectively. The Sadhaka should meditate on his body consisting of the length or twelve and halr fingers, others than that of his own in the lotus below the heart for six months, he overo omos death. In thrów year, he attains the position equal to that of the Lord or purusa 

tattva. 

23. The 8180 and the others should be moditated upon in the heart. The Sadhalce. undoubtedly guta tho fruito 

springing from the veil of Puruga tattva.132. 

24. I (9 iva) have explained this Philosophyof Tadenta in an abridged forn which Kapila in days gone by ërplained in deta 11. 

25. The Sadhaka, concentrating his mind on his body appear ing just like the group of olouds or the avon Ing twilight of the autumn, for six months, obtains un doubtedly disattachment (Vita Ragatve). 

26. By one year's practice, the Sadhaka 13 free from old age and death. By three years practice he atta ing the knowledge of the veil of Raga (attachment) 

tattva. 

27. In order to be disattached, a Sadhaka should boditate on his red body staying an id olouds, for six months. 

28. Meditating on the tattva mentioned above for ona year, the Sadhaka is not troubled by death. By tho practice of three years, the Sadhaka overpowers tho couple fof the opposite qualities, suoh as, pleasure and pain and 

atta ing a balance of the mind in rage tattva. 

29. The Sadhaka, meditating on his own body, having the red colour and seated on the red lotus flower', Egons isting of the length or five ringers and situated on the boundary or the heart, obtains gradually the fruito already mentioned. 

30. The Yogin, meditating on the diso, already mentioned arain and again, has all the fruits coming out of the veil of the raga tattva. 

31. The Sadhaka should meditate on a whit.. lotus having sixteen leaves, full or fluorescent beautiful, rilled with ambrosia and situated on a round protubor'ange nado op 

the moon. 

133. 

32. The Sadhaka should continue to control his calm mind till he sleeps in that Samadhi (Meditative stato). Then whatever the Sadhaka gees in the dream, bodoues truo. 

33. Praotising thus, the Yogin, in duo oouroq of time, obtains the fruits mentioned in connection with medi tation on the lotus. 

34. Thus meditating on his body consisting or four fingers, everywhere, the Sadhaka has, as already mentioned, the fruit coming out of vidya tattva, 

35. The Sadhaka should meditate separately on the threa wheels situated on the place one and a halr finger above the heart, wnioh contains red, blue and white colour, respectively.. 

36. Three fingars' Purus a tattva, having the lustro of Siva eto, which is said to be in the heart, whould be known as three tattvas 1.6. atma tattya, vidya tattva and parthiza tattva. 

37. Learned people should know thirtoon kinds upto the three tattva. Two tattvas aro explained according to eleven kinds. 

1: 38. The Sadhaka should meditate on his own form visible like a thing, seen by shining eyes, situated in the navel, which exists in a whool, the boundary of which is throat, in the body made of five spokes. 

39. Ir the Lord of the Yoging puririos all tlie things, situated in the road beginning from Carth tattva to Kala tattva, he is not overpowered by the Kala tattva. 

40. The moditation or tho Yogins on the disa and others brings the fruits or Kala tattva wasily. 

150. 

41. The Yorina conogatrating on their wind on the throat which is in the form or the sky and on tho diso there, every day, has the fruit of Haya tattvä. 

42. The Yogin, meditating on tho a iso roncabling that of the moon caught by Rahu, which ig appear ing lika the formation of a throat, never comes under the control 

of Maya tattva. 

43. The Yogin, meditating on his body, mado or light, which is a bandoned by the sun of heaven, obtains 

Paramesahood. . 

44. 45. The Yoxin should meditate on the colleot ive form of Mantra, staying in the soft palato (Lambaka) and appearing like the form of rays or the midday sun. In course of time, the Yogin obtains the State of Mantrag and their inoidental fruit, whioh has already been went ion 

ed. 

46. On meditating on the image of Mantra, the Sadhaka has Mantresahood. Having consentrated his nind on the illum inative splendour, the Ygoin attains the position of Mantramahesvara. 

47. The Sadhaka, meditating on tho light parvad ing the exterior interior, dovaward and upward, gets the position of the splendour mentioned above and novor falls from the rank of Mantramahesvara. 

48. 49. The Yogin, with pleasure and cloued eyes, seated in the posture of Padma in a secluded pieco which is free from sound and light, popoating Paramantra, whould placa his mind between the two wyobrows a bit Outsido and a bit in front. Thus ho soo0 a man having the length of 

twelve fingers. 

140. 

50. 61. The Yogin should stabilizo his mind on (the purusa of twelve ringors). Arter three months, he 8008 (the same purusa) oquipped with all limbs moveable, holding the form of light much ploauod and appearing 11ko the moon, wr with his divine eyes. On seeing tho divino purusa, the Yogin learns the time or his death. 

52. If the man is headloss, the death or Yogin 19 corta in within six months. The Yogin ahould try to cheat death oarefully. 

53. The Sadhaka should meditate on tho a iso or the moon, which is free from blot, from whioh ambrosia 15 oozing, divine and filling the body of the Sadhala in the aperture in the crown or the hoad (Brahmarandhra). 

54. The Sadhaka, meditating on his 1 imitod 2011 in its exterior and interior phagos, filled with tho divo spread ing in the mind whioh is in the form or a channel, for ten days, overpowers death. 

55. The Yog in should moditate on ovory limb or 

the Purusa to take away the diseases or the dirporant parts or the body. He should also praotiso this Yoga for avort 

ing dreadful diseases. 

:56. Ir the sad haka sees the blaokioh colour or the man, he will fall a viotin to a great diseaud, Ilha sees blaok oolour, he will having leprosy. Thoro 19 tho danger of small pox 1r ho goes bluza colour. 

57. There is eye-discago when the non (or twolvo fingers seen by the Sadhaka is devoid or cyes. When the man appears without the nose, there is aouodigoquo, The 1 imbs whioh are not soen in the man, show that the Sadhaka will get diseases in thoso partu or the body. 

141. 

58. 59. 60. The Sadaka, doing the piaotico ot the Yoga for himselr or for the salce of others, within five years, O Isvari, knows Vidya tattva and onjoyo ito fruit. He does not fall from the stage, whon ho med itatoa on the splendour existing in vidya tattva, whion @preadu all over his body. The Yogin, in due course of time, obtains all the fruits already mentioned. 

i 

61. 62. 63. 64. Ir he meditates on the tattva 

onward (Isyara tattva) he is not separated from it. 

He 

does not return from the stage of mentresvara and mantra mahesvara. The Yogin, meditating on the highly effulgent (Isvara tattva) in the forehead, seos oight firat lotters of the eight groups which are combined respectively.' 

The first lettor (a) is like sapphire. The gecond letter has the lustre of the throat or a peacock. The third letter appears like a jewel uued by kings. The fourth lotter is like lapis lazuli. The firth lottor seems just like topaz. The sixth latter is as luainous au a coral. The seventh-letter is like ruby. Tho last lotter has the light of the moon. On sooing this best ortulgando, the Yogin obtains divina knowledge. 

65. All the divine activities such an enjoyment. 

and wandering to and from como to the Yogin. A meditator on the Isvaratattva attains the stage or Isvara tattva. and never falls from it. 

66. All this in accordance with tho Lakyabhada' 18 explained. Now Oittabheda in its abridged rora 18 dogoribed. 

81. Tho Sadhaka, with a desiro to cut the 'oight qualities oonsisting or a group or the wichs worlag, baginn. ing from the pisaca world upto the end or *divaambula 

142. 

atabilize his mind ot the same qualities, which it desires 

to achieve, on the Isvara tattva. 

88. How to devote the mind to this path, boginn. ing from the earth to 'Isvara tattva is separately oxplain ed for the sake of Yogins to have success in the way or 

Yoga. 