+++
title = "१८"

+++
EIGHTEENTH ADHIKARA 

1. To-day I tell you the most seurot Yoga wiich is not told to anybody and which is inaccessible to the ginners. Please hear it. 

2. A Yogi, having left all other things asido, should stabilise his mind here. He should not worship tho phallus (1 inga) made or olay, stone, metal or ca. 

8. He should worship the spiritual Lingy where the moveable and Immoveable world 110 hidden. Tho oxistendo (Lingatva) of the external objects (vahirlinga) 18 pervadea by this spiritual lings. 

4. Therefore, a Sadhaka, having full xalianoo on thig non-dualiam, should worship this Linga by meditation on the suprema paramanu (Parana Siva) o Devosi. 

5. The one, who has nod itated on thla Linga,, can 8ee it which is staying in the heart as a vibration, and no one else. 

6. 7. Raving rixed his mind on that vikation, which is technically oalled as "Kanpa (Trembling) ana "ud bhava" (souros), a Yogin obtains peace in a month. Then the linga, which has a pure lustre and whioh lau 1111inated the whole body with its effulgence, rises from tho hoart to the aperture of the crown of the head (brahmarandhxa). 

8. The intelligent and attentivo Yogin, having fixed his mind on the forehead for one month, can doo all the Mantras in it. 

9. 10. Thers are all auc008Sou whon this meditation is established thero for uix months. The 

148. 

Yogin, who without the lowledge of the (real) Linga, depends upon the Linga (made or olay sto.), 115 orrorts aro usoloss and he does not enjoy the fruit of the (real) linga. It is a Saiva (related to Siva) Hahalinga and is accompanica by the limited selr (whioh is also vited as linga). 

. 11. When this knowledge of tho Linga (atuan px Siva) 18 accomplished, the Yogin (lingin) 19 als or bed into the Siva (Lingastha) and becomes free from tho lluga iado of the olay etc. (Linga varjita). It is no wonder, 12 ho em braced by this Linga (siva) becomes 'Just 11ko Siva. . 

12. When a Yogin initiated by the Linga (siva) goes out he is called a Lingin (a perfect Salva). The whole universe (puranta) is linga (81va). 

13. 14. 15. By the possession of this Linga Jnana, Yoging are called as Lingins or Lingita (Lit. Lingun Jaten asye iti, that 18, the one who has realised Linga, Siva). All the Mantras are pervaded by this Linga (9iva) in its two forms, 1.9., peaceful and dreadful. Ir a Yogia medi tates on Siva who is in his dreadful forn, ho cannot be seen by gods demons and mon easily, ho can now everything fearlessly and booomes free from birth and death. 

16. Arter a while in this tranoe, a Yogin becomoa uniried with the violent Mantra (raudra manteovoga) and 8868 everything whion is luninous 14ko opore3.or the ouns. 

17. He sees the impor ishable and unmanirosted the Salva (related to siva) light, whloh is callca Bhairava. On seeing it, he attains omnigolanoo within uix months. 

18. The contentment which ho gots by the sight of this light cannot be got in the other Yokaw which are artifioial. Besides, he is llborated from all the bondage 

149. 

19. The Yogas in which the notivities of the restraints of breath (Pranayama) predominate aro artiricial and cannot compete even with the sixteenth part or this 

real Yoga. 

20. Thus a Yogin, practising this Yoga, sees divine marks. A Yogin sits silently and thinks nothing. 

When 

21. He burns all his sing and good doods. his body burns he feels a trembling (Prakampa). 

22. If he stabilises himself in that trembling state, a light manifests in his inner being. On seeing this high radiance, he attains divine knowledge. 

23, 24. In this state, he, even enjoying objeots, becomes independent Sive. For the time being, when họ openg his eyes, he feels his selr res ia ing evckywhero, with a view to get all fruits, he should ned itato on this 

• 

• 

• 

state. 

• 

25. The Yogin, who is trembling, should conoen trate himself on that strongest limited self, full of all. Thus he 800g splendour coming from all aides to his forehead. 

26. On seeing that light, e Yogin atteinu divino knowledge within six months. He is cavily suocessful ir he does this practice for one year. 

27. A Yogin, having medo his mind porvad ing all, has strength equal to that of Siva and goes wierover ho 

likes. 

88. 29. 30. A Yogin has sakti Avena (unirioation with Sakt 1) in which trembling is experienoed whon that state is established in a month, a Yogin pocs a light pervading his exterior and interior being. When this 

150. 

stage is established, a Yogin attains a olear and unobstruo ted knowledge which is connected with the senses. Sarven driya jam or Sarvagam means here that which is connected with the objeot of the senses. 

31. This one tattva ozolud ing the gengoa or action (Karmendriya) and intellest (Buddhi) 19 explained by dirferant synonyms. 

32. A learned Sadhaka, having made his mind stable, should continue to cono entrate himself on the Sakti which is everywhere till he is fully identical with it. 

33, Then he gets the idea "I ara everywhers and every thing is in mo' at one. A Yogin of this idea, 

aving burnt all the nets or bonds, has the fruit whioh 

he desires for. 

34. On being fully confident, a Yogin should preot ise this Yoga by which his solr is freed from the objects or the world and is absorbed into tho pupr cue Boing. 

35. The place into whioh his selr is absorbed and which is a source of all Mantras should be known or two kinds that is external and intornal. 

36. 57. The object (Matra) chiefly obtainablo, (Pra yatavya), should be known as yiolding all Bidahiy. A wise Sadhaka should check the objeot whioh is moving in a dreaming mood in the state between the waking and dx gou ing, for a moment. Then he will see the consoiounoud which is all whole and the measurement of which is two fingers and a quarter. 

38. This is thp highest principle from which the whole universe is born. According to the sidaha Yogiovari Tantra it is the body of Mantras. 

151. 

39. 40. The Vantras Gm braoed by that for, yiola all siddhis. A Sadhaka, who 19 free from the idea or the avoidable and acceptable group and who has changed a bit his external and internal form, goto what is called Siva tattva. By meditation on it, he attains. omnisolongo. 

41. 42. Undoubtedly ha 2003 dlvino mazku. 3 his body is deformed by his own accord then 10 ghould be ooncluded that he has got the best knowledge or tho principle. He, practising that letter, becomes omnisoont. 

43. 44. 45. 46. 47. A Yogin arter enjoying the desired sidahi attains a high a bode. Ho should worship his solr, with soent eto, in the aperture of the crown of the head (Brahmarandhra) reopootfully and montally. Sprinkling of a liquid substance on it 1. its bath. Ofter ing of the scented paste of the Sandal wood to it is its sacrifice. Oblation of the six juices to it 19' Its tood. Whatever letter is uttered before it, should be lmnown as its Jape'. When a Sadhaka, on controlling his mind, stays amid the flames of the burning substances, this is tho sacrificial oblation (Homa) of the objcot. The foruj which he sees, should be known as ito dhyand (ucditation). 

48. In course of this Yoga, th19 profound advaita Yajana (Saorifice of Non-dualism) which has the lustro equal to that of the rising sun, is explainoa. The wind ahould be stablised in the upper door and the heart or in the apertune of the crown or the head. 

49. 50. By Titteen days' praotlom the form 13 notioed. On practising the form found out, a Yogin beoones omniscient. In this practice, a Yogin, on cover ing his face by a cloth, should fix his mind on the object 

(Lakaya). 

152. 

51. 52. The tattva porvadou the wholo body, from the navel below upto the Brahma Randra (shikhavagh1). The 

form of the tattva is full of rays and flames and appears like a very subtle star. Then a Yogin sees the form or his gelr in the upper corner of the heart (Prana Sakti avasana). The same form, which a Yogin praotises, expanda. 

53. 64. All the Tantras say that the form in the mouth of all the mantras. By its practice for one month, a Yogin obtains special knowledge (Samvitti) by which ho can know all that is not expressed and that is still exist ing in the mind. A Yogin should not disolose this know ledge to any one. 

55. After reciting the Vedas, he should explain th1g Yoga. He does not have to meet untimely death. Ir he dies by a fall into a pit, he gradually attains a good position. 

58. On knowing thus, o vahadevi, a Yogin should pay attention to his well being. A digoiple receiving this Yoga by injustice goes to hell. 

87. If he learns it by just 100, he does not mest unt imely death. My (Siva's) word is true. A wan, having acquired knowledge by justion does not suffer any 1083. 

68. The Yogin (who is a wise teacher or the pupil), having placed him (pup11) beforo him with his own (pupil's) form, should deprive him or his Imowlcago whion he has got by injustice. 

50. 80. The teacher should do the sixtola angan yaga, oited in the Bhuvanadhva, or the body or tho pupil, He then, after showing him a lamp, whould take the splendour from the thumb of his foot to tho aperturs of the orown' or 

153. 

the head. The aplendour should be thought to have been unified with Siva. 

61. 62. 83. The toaohor should med State on 8iva whose form 18. Just like darkneds and who ha volling powar in him, and on his Sati falling from the same way coming to the front of the thumb of his foot parvad ing tho external. as well as internal body of the pupil and appearing like thick collyriu. 

By the application of this method, the knowledge of the Mantras and the Vidyas (acquired by him by injustice) do no good to the foolish and the wicked pup11. If the digo iple is not seen and the above mentioned method is in applicable a quru can take them back by the mental appli dation of the above mentioned method (olttabhisandhimatra). 

64. If the pupil is found out somehow or the other and is harmful to the teacher, having thought of a also of the sun, should treak it before him (pup11). 

65. Being full of wrath, he should think of the pup11 as being overpowered by the Surya Rupa Sakti and 'algo under the weight of thousands of sins. 

68. 67. 68. This process should not be followed even for the sake of play. The man fallon trou knowledge by this method can not be appointed to the Yoge until ho 18 raised to the position by the same Guru, who has degraded 

him. 

The guru whose mind is full of meroy, having! purified him, should do his initiation by Pranayama and other well known expiatory rites. 

69. Thus, ho being attentive to his work, has all the frusts. A pupil should try his best to have a 

154. 

good teacher for the purpose. 

70. A pupil should not try to find out the good or bad character of the Guru who has given tho' contentment, full of Siva-Jnana, which is in the form of ambrosie. 

71. 72. 73. He is the only person, who Inows whether his charaoter is useful or useless, The obedient and learned pupil should warn him when he is taken to bad deeds suon as snatching of life and property. When warned he does not leave a side his bad deeds, he should go olso where and meditate on Siva. This method of Yoga has boen explained in its a bridged form and is useful to Yogins. 

75. There is no renunoiation or anything. There is no question of marriage or non-marriage. Hold ing or the look of hair and getting of ashes with whioh to besmear the body are out or question, 

fasts. field. 

76. There is no renunciation or acoeptance of A Sadhaka is not advised to enter into a raligious There is no observation or conventional practices. 

77. Worship and knowledge of the form or Siva, Phallus-worship, name and Gotra or a Badhaka are not ro quired in this Yoga. Neither anything is en joined nor prohibited. 

78. Even a thing prohibited should be known 0.93 en joined' and it should be done regularly o Devesi. 

79. A Yogin should stabilise his mind in a tott Whatever he chooses as an object for his meditation doen not matter. It should be followed atriotly. 

80. The one, who has fixed his mind on a tattva even enjoying the objects of the world, is not touched by 

155. 

defects just the lotus lost ever residing in water does not get iteoll attached to it. 

81. Ad a snako oharmer bound up by mantras which take off poison over while wat ing poison ho is not doluded. Similar is the case with the intelligent Yogin, 

Have you to 

O Devi, this Yoga is explained. ask about anything else? 
