+++
title = "реиреж"

+++
TWENTIETH ADHIKARA. 

1. For the sake or Yogins to achieve suncobs' in Yoga, keeping in view the divisions, pinda, oto., Sakta (related to Sakti) philosophy is explained in brior and not in detail. 

26 As ordinarily 'Pinda' means body, similarly in the case of Sakti and Siva, the Pinda' means body, the other synonyms of whion are 'Bra buia 'Anada Bala Tejas Virya and Ojas. 

3. The body of the universal solr is overlasting and beginningless. Inspite of its obstruction by ignorance, it, for the manifestation of the world, the world, proosed 8 without obstruction. 

4. The pinda of Sakti and Siva, leaving its previous State and going to be evolved, gots whatever stages of knowledge are explained below. 

5. The 'Pada' is that state by whioh a Sadhaka atta ing entire knowledge or Siva and Sakti. 

6. The 'Rupa. 18 that short living state, by which limited self is entirely known. That state, whioh 18 absolutely beyond the approach or senses, has been termed "Rupatita' or 'Turiya'. 

7. An intelligent Sadhaka, having saluted his Guru (Preooptor), should meditato on that stage. He should also continue his meditation till ho attains the place free from diseases and obstruotion. 

8. The intelligent-3adhaka, having saluted his Guru, should concentrate his mind on it. Douying that 

it is not and it is not that, he should continue his Yogio 

c167. 

activities and observation in oonnsotion with the supreme Reality, with his mind full of Yogic errorts t111 he attains the place free from diseases and obstacles. It will also suffice for the Yogin. 

ense 

9. 10. When the Yogin, having made his limited soul which is free from the object of senses, identical with the 'Rur lye. tattva', stays for a moment, he rools the statos - Kampa (Lit. trembling), trn bhrana (11t. wander ing) ua bhava (Lit. Source) Nidra (Lit. sleep) and a bit Ananda (Lit. pleasure). He should carefully fix his mind there with the intention of attaining better fruits. 

11. This is the form of the individual solr, which has been expressed by Siva. It should not ba considered that the form of Siva is also stablo there. 

12. 13. The Rupatita state in which the form of the atman (1 imited soul) 19 experienced, corroborates the form of Siva. Therefore, in this sense, it should be known as 'Stable' (Sthita). The Yogin should practise the first stage (Pindastha) one of the four above mentioned stages, whioh has four kinds, though from point of view or devotion, it 19 one. The Sthula Pindastha or simply 

Pindastha' divided into four kinds, hes mainly two kinds, 

viz., External and internal. 

14. 15. The bhautika (Lit. related to living beings or five elements) means external aubatance and the other kind 18 Ativahika (Lit. related to subtle substance) spiritual. The Yogin, supported by the late stage, byen having the fruits in viow, obtains the lmowledgo or the objects of senses in full and of the spirit only in part. 

16. 17. Then he sees religious places such as 'Pitha' and 'Kaatra' oto., in the sxterior or his body. 

168. 

He should stablize his mind in whatever he finds in it by his observation. Thus ho attains everything there. In order to have higher objects, he should not stay there. 

18. Pada state is a bit higher than the Pindastha state which is meant "Sakala and Pralayalala pranatro.. This state, though free from the two kinds of the Pindastha state, is a bit full of impressions derived from tho nemory or the Pindastha state. This stage lies between vijnana kala and Mantra Pramatra. 

19. The Yogin, arter reaching this stage, attains a higher stage of knowledge owing to the appearanoe of the dreamless state. 

20. As it works in (different) four ways, 10 should be known to be fourfold. The Sadhaka who does practice in this State, obtains fruits of the thirtya ix 

principles and becomes their meator. .. 

21. 22. The Rupastha atage is not totally free from the Padastha stage. This Rupastha or susupti state, enlightens the nature of the ultimato Reality and therefore, 1t is filled with that Reality. Rupaatha means to be identified with it. This stage is also or four kinds with the varieties, suoh as, "Ud ita' eto. 

23. 24. O devesi, in this stage the distinguished knowledge springs up. I (siva) am its fruit as it is full of me. The mind fixing itself on the tattvas or stages, which stand in the way of the higher stage, in accordando with the gradual Yoga, attains pure arid dignified stage - 'Pupatita' or 'Turya which aocording to its fruits has also been mentioned or four kinds. 

.85. The Sadhaka, with a view to obtain all siddhis 

169. 

having praotised three varieties of it, dies at once when be is on vorge to onter to fourth kind or it. 

26. Keeping varieties, pinda ato. in view, the knowledge of Siva 18 explained. Listen to the number or the Mantras and Vidya according to the method of tho practice of Yoga. 

27. 28. 29. A Sadhaka bound by the method already cited, cono entrating his mind, for seven days, on tho letter 'Sauh (which is mantra ot Para Sakt1) in any place aforesaid, that is, navel, heart, throat, place between two eyes brows and forehead, which has illuminated the body and belly with its form and a group of erfulgences and which has beautified the entiro universe with its sharp lustre, attains profound unification with the Sakt of Rudra. 

30, 31, 32, 33, 84. The Yogin when the sakti 01 Rudra, has entered into him, speaks many sentences in Sanskrit, laughs loudly, sings and sometimes utters the sound like thet of the female jackal. He only does this and knows nothing. After a month, whatever a ireotion the Yogin, tree from the activities, above mentioned, sees, appears full of rays. Whatever directions the Yogin ... practising the Yoga for aix months, sees, he finds various forms in it. Neither he should fix his mind on the nor abandon his practices. 

84. A timid Yogin, doing this, goes mi mad but a brave ono, even though we attached to the through carelessness, resumes his onergy. 

35. The Yogin, praotising Parapara or Apara Mantra for one year, attaing success desired by his mind in Yoga. 

170. 

56. He should utter the "Navatmaka' mantra which 18 the heart or Bhairava and which la alao teraed as Matrka Sad bhava, or Rati 3 ekhara. Mantra i 

37. 38. Or, he should repeat the group or night sakt is, such as Aghori etc. or group of mahsavari sto. Om Amrta eto., Rudra or Bakti. All of them are forms of Ruira and Sakti and, therefore, they all have equal strength. Now the difference of all Rudras, which are filled with nectar, is erpla ined. 

39. The Vidya Mantra should be prepared by the word "H" beaut iried by a dot (Dipita). Then the Para Mantra Sauh' should be used. Aga in the latter *** with a dot on it should be written. Thus the whole Mantra would be as under 'Ham gauh Ham'. 

40. The Yogin should utter the 'above mentioned Hantra in the circleg made of twelve spokes, sixteen spokes, eight spokes, three apokes or hundred spokes 0 Dovi. 

41. The utterer of the Mantra should utter tho aforesaid mantra in the cirole consisting of piz spokes. Listen to the kinds of tho oirolo which are two hundred and dirty in brief. 

48. These two hundred and rirty eiroles are age in multiplied by female (exolus ivoly), male, end mized and those olasses in which male and female are found together. Keeping the nature of the work in viow, every one of them has twelve varieties. 

43. (The names of the twelve oiroles are given below:-) Daksa (I.1t. wise), Canda (Lit. angry), Hara (Lit. that steals) Saund in (Lit. drunkard), Prantha (Lit. that pressos) Bhima (Lit. terrible) Manmatha (Lit. that 

171. 

presses mind), Sakuni (Lit. a bird), Swati (Lit. having a good intellect), Nanda (11t, ono who pleasex), Gopala (so proteots cows) and pitamaha (Lit. grandfather). Thega 

O 

are twelve male olabs88. 

44. 45. 46. 47. Twelve female olasses are given below:- Nanda, Bhadra, Jaya, Kali, Karali, Virtanana, Krostaki, Bh Imamudra, Vayuvaga, Hayanana, Gambhira and Ghosani. These are twelve systematically. Your Agnoy1 eto, six Brahmani etc. and two 3 iddhi and rdahi make the group of twelve Saxt is or following Dames mako the group of twelve Sakt 18. Laksmi, Dipti, Mala, Sikha, Siva, Sumukhi, Vem ani, Nanda, Harikesi, Hayanana, Visvesi and Sumakhya, should be known as twelve Saktis systematically. All the vowels except Santha Swaraskar (R, R, L, Ir.) 

should be known their donotors. 

48, 49, 50. 51. Keeping feriale, and walc olasses in view, a Sadhaka should repeat sixteen Amrta eto. Rudras 

in the ofrolo consisting of sixteen spokes or in the place of sixteen Amrta eto. . Rudras. He should ropeat Sri Kantha, Ananta, Suksma, trimurti, Sarvarisvara, Arabesk, Bhara bhuti, Sthiti, Sthanu, Hara, Jhinthiga, bhaut ika, Sadyo jata, Anugrahesvare, Mura and Mahasena. Tho Saktis 

RE 

of the aforesaid gixtoon Rudras-Srikantha eto. ara sidahi 

Radhi, Dyuti, Laksmi, Medha, Kanti, Svadha, dhrti, Dipti, Pusti, Mati, Kirti, Sanathiti, Sugati, Smrti and Suprabha. 

52. In the oirole consisting of sixteen epokos, all vowels should be plaoed. In the circle consisting or eight spokes the group of sight Aghora sto. and oight Aghori ato. should be placed. 

53. Liston to the group of Mahesi oto. Nenda eto. Brahmani ato. and the group of the twenty four Rudras, 

! 

178. 

whion are to be placed in the mightfold circle. 

54. 55. 56. Samvarta 

lalulisa, burgu, Svota, 

baka, Khadgin, Pinakin, bhujaga, vali, mahakala, dviranda, Cohagalanda, Sikhin, lohita, nosa, Mina, Tridandin, Asadhin, Umakanta, Ardhanarise, Daruka, Langalia, Soma and Isa aro twenty four Rudras. 

57. Letters from 'Ka' to Bha' and from "Ya' to *Ha should be med itatod on in the oirole' consisting of eight spokes. The letter a' should be placed above all. 

68. 59. 60. 61. 62. In the oirolo consisting or six spokes gradually jum 'Svaha and six Rudras - Vall : Valinanda, Dasagriva, Hara, Haya, and Madhava, O Yahadevi with their six Saktis, Visa, Visvosvari, Haradri, Virana.. yika, Amba and Gurva should be med 1tated on with their vijamantras. All these latters from a to Xsao, mixed up with another owing to the variations of master and voll ar, givers or all suooos88s to the Yogins who axo dovoted to their meditation and servios. 

62. Or the Yogins, repeating or meditating on the Vidya Mantra which is alroady said to be in niddle of tk all the oiroles, achieves all quocesses. 

The Yoga yielding all sorts of successes 19 explained in its abbreviated forn. 