+++
title = "२२"

+++

1.o darling, I (siva) tell you another mout secret Yoga in the form or nectar, which 18 the best or all and which is not disclosed to anybody. 

2. The name of the oonridential Yoga is Surya Krati (Lit. drawing of the sun) whion yields success to the Yoginis within four months and might days. 

3. Eighth part of a "Prahara" (three hours) is ga 18.to be Nad ika' (22 minutes). The Yogin should praotise this Sadhana with the increase of one-fourth of the time into it. 

4. 5. The Yogin who has done Nyasa and has remedied cold, should practise the Yoga from sunrise to 

gun-set in a place where the sun is soon and which is fro0 from man and all sorts or obstructions, in the month or Magha.177. 

8. 7. The Yorin should place the wheels of eight epokes, six spokes and twelve spokes, full of the sight Bhairavas and compact mass of Siva and Sakti, accompanied by six Beasons of the year, months and full of planets, in the 118c of the sun. He should meditate on the wheel eight spokes in the dise of the sun and other two wheels in the rays of the sun. 

8. The wise Sadhaka, having fixed his wind for time prescribed, should see the diac of the sun with his 

opened eyes. 

9. When time passes, he, with his olosed eyes, enters the world which is dark inside but tree fron hindranos. 

10. The Yogin who has opened his eyes thers, sees a form of the diso. He should continue to cono entrate his mind there till he sees the tattve required. 

11. Inspite of the disappearance of the tattva, 

the Yogin, meditating op the tattva, should stay there for the remaining period of time 0 Dovi, within a month, the tattva is stabilized. 

12. After two months, he sees the tattva overy where without doubt. After three months, he soos the tattva covered by the also of the sun. 

13. In the end of the tima-limit prescribed ror, he sees Paramos a in the wheel in the middle of the diso of the sun in the month of Jatha. 

'14. Having drawn the tattve found out, he shoua take it to the mouth in order to establish it thore. As already oited, he, after drinking it, should rena in quite 

calm. 

178. 

15. When the Yogin, on uniting his self with it 

for a moment, stays, he leaves the earth, o Devi. 

COOT 

16. In accordance with this method, in the pre Bence of the people, who see there, the Lord or the Yogins identified with the sun, koes away. Devi. 

17. He falls nowhere from Siva State to carth". tattva. Having got abundant enjoyment, he is absorbed in the tattva which is highly transcendental. 

18. It is Khesari Cakra (a wheel to fly in thoaky) which is explained with its secret in Siddha Yogisvari, Tantra and by which a man occupies a posture of flying in the sky. 

19. The man, who has control over himsoll, med 1 tating on his own body in the form of a wheel in ito exterior and interior pets aforesaid fruit. 

• 20. 21. The wise Sadhaka, on stabilising his wind on his forehead, uttering Malini trora Pha! to Na in reverse, with the application or au loaves tho earth'. atonce. The Yogin practising thus for a month, noves on 

the earth like a wheel. 

22. In a moment he touchas earth end at another moment the sky. He utters the sound just like that of a female jackal. He moves round in a cirole and flaps. 

23. 24. He does many postures and speaks innunder able languagos. After six months, the Yogin, on loving the earth, having firm senses and fully absorbed in Samadhi stays in the sky in the form of a hand and sees a great number of the female attendants on aiva, consisting or various forms. 

85. Artor one year, the Yogin, in the presence of 

17. 

tha poople who see him, 111iminating aircotions becomes equal to the female attendants on Siva. 

26. He goes from the earth and becomes a ruler or the Yoginis moving in the sky. According to the Yogini Tantra, it is said to be as Theoari. Mudra (Posture). 

27. 28. 29. An alert and wise Yogin, who has protected himselr' in the thiok darkness, on waking three days and nights and on worshipping Mahesvara on the fourth day in the beginning of the night, should stabilize his mini between two eyes brows. Thus the Yogin soated on a beautiful seat, sees the light, The Yogin should practise this process continuously. 

30. 31. In a month, the Yokin Bees the thing ly ing in the interior of the house. In two and three months, he sees everything outside and in a city respeotively. In four and five months be sees things in the country and in the whole globe. Within six months, he sees tho earth full of holes. 

32. 33. 34. With a year, the Yogin has the position of all-knowdrship, sees all that is in the perrasion of the group of Yoginis and Siddhas and becomes equal to then, 

On leaving aside various doto the Yeginy standing on the seat of novastika" should med itats on the puro form or Siva. With this process, he attains all fruits atore said by this method also. 
