+++
title = "1394 Verse 2149"

+++
## Original 
>
> नैव वा ग्रहणे तेषां शब्दे बुद्धिस्तु तद्वशात् ।  
> संस्कारानुकृतेश्चाऽपि महत्त्वाद्यवबुध्यते ॥ २१४९ ॥ 
>
> *naiva vā grahaṇe teṣāṃ śabde buddhistu tadvaśāt* \|  
> *saṃskārānukṛteścā'pi mahattvādyavabudhyate* \|\| 2149 \|\| 
>
> “Or, there may be no apprehension of these (pitches); it is only the cognition of the word-sound that is brought about through the pitch. as for the degrees of the pitch,—in the shape of intensity, etc.—they are cognised, in accordance with the impressions (made by the sound-pitch).”—[*Ślokavārtika-sphoṭa*, 40].—(2149)



## Kamalaśīla

The following *Text* justifies the dual notion, even under the view that there is no apprehension of the Pitch:—[*see verse 2149 above*]

‘*Teṣām*’—of the Pitches; consisting of the conjunctions and disjunctions of Air.

*Question*;—How can there be a cognition of the *Manifested* when the Manifester is not cognised?

*Answer*:—‘*It is only, etc. etc*.’—‘*Tadvaṣāt*’—through the Pitch; he. by the mere presence of the Pitch.

*Question*;—There may be apprehension of the mere form of the Word-Sound; how is there the apprehension of the degrees of the Pitch?

*Answer*;—‘*They are cognised*, *etc. etc*.’;—When the more intensive Pitch produces an intensive impression on the Ear, then that intensity is cognised in the Sound; on the other hand, when the impression produced is weak, the Sound is perceived as weak. Thus the varying degrees of the Pitch are apprehended in accordance with the impression made upon the Ear.—(2149)


