+++
title = "05 The Śaivas’ Inclusivist View of Their Own and the Vaidikas’ Religion"

+++
As for the Śaivas, they likewise seem to undermine the unity of Hinduism by insisting not merely on the validity of their own scriptures but also on their superiority to the Vaidika scriptures and indeed to the scriptures of all non-Śaiva systems. This was already so in the earliest known Śaiva initiatory system, that of the  Pāñcārthika Pāśupatas of the Atimārga, whose ascetic initiates were to see themselves as having severed all ties with the Vaidika religion, leaving behind their former obligations to the gods and ancestors to focus their devotion on Śiva/ Rudra alone;33 and it continued to be so in the Mantramārga, even though this  later form of the religion, in evidence from about 450–550 onwards, expanded  the community of the initiated beyond that of ascetics, important though they  continued to be, by opening up initiation to householders, allowing them, indeed requiring them, to remain in this status after they had received initiation. 

33. See, e.g., Kauṇḍinya, Pañcārthabhāṣya on 2.9: ‘This brahmin’s qualification and obligation to make  offerings to the gods and his ancestors applied [only] before [his initiation]. Therefore he should [now]  withdraw devotion from these gods and ancestors and in place of both fix his heart on Maheśvara and  worship him and no other. The word ca here [in pitr̥vac ca] expresses prohibition. It implies that the  reason why he should no longer make offerings to the [other] gods and his ancestors is that they lack  the agency that he used to attribute to them.’ 


It might appear, therefore, that Śaivism was as much distinct from, and  opposed to, the religion of the Vaidikas as the latter was to the former and as  both were to Buddhism and Jainism. However, while the Śaivas thought their  scriptures superior to the Vaidikas’ and the Vaidikas thought their own superior, the two traditions’ views of each other were not symmetrical, not at least  where the Śaivas of the Mantramārga were concerned, these alone having left  us adequate evidence of their views on this issue. For while most Vaidika theoreticians during this period condemned the Śaiva scriptures as false, the Śaivas  of the Mantramārga held unanimously that the Śruti and Smr̥ti of Brahmanism are universally and uniquely valid in their own sphere, that of prescribing the conduct and religious observance obligatory for persons in their identity as married and unmarried members of the caste-classes (varṇāśramadharmaḥ), and that as such they are man’s sole means of valid knowledge both of all actions (karma)  that benefit and harm the soul’s destiny in the domain of recurrent incarnation (samsāraḥ) and of the nature of the consequences of these actions, from the rewards of the heavens to the tortures of the hells. 

Nor did they deny the reality of Brahmanism’s goal, that of liberation  (mokṣaḥ), offered to those who aspired to escape recurrent incarnation through  knowledge, unmotivated obedience to ritual injunctions, or both. They denied  only that it was ultimate, holding that true, definitive liberation lay beyond it and  could be reached through Śaivism alone, by undergoing initiation in the presence of the Maṇḍala of Śiva (śivamaṇḍala-dīkṣā) and then following the Śaiva ritual  and meditative disciplines, or, in the case of those prevented by incapacity or social responsibilites from taking up those disciplines, notably their royal patrons,  through initiation followed by fervent devotion manifest in support of the Śaiva  religion and its institutions. 

Nor was the validity of the Vaidika scriptures irrelevant to the Śaivas within  their own world of Śaiva rites and belief. Indeed Sadyojyotis, who is much the  earliest of the commentators on the Śaiva scriptures whose works have reached  us – he flourished sometime between the second half of the seventh century and  the beginning of the ninth, probably no later than the first half of the eighth 34 –  insisted that the defence of the validity of the Vaidika scriptures (Śruti and Smr̥ti)  is essential to a belief in the validity of the scriptures of the Śaivas themselves. He offered two cogent reasons. 

- 34. See Sanderson 2007a. 

The first is that if the Vaidika scriptures were  not the source of valid knowledge in their domain, as the Buddhists and Jains insist,  then Śaivism’s central claim that it frees the initiate from the cosmic hierarchy of the  levels of incarnation would be empty. Śaivas must believe that the Vaidika scripural  corpus is valid because the initiation rituals prescribed in their scriptures and performed by Śiva himself through their officiants bring about the progressive freeing  of the soul from a cosmos created and maintained for and by the enactment and consequences of meritorious and demeritorious actions, and these actions, as we have seen, are held by the Śaivas to be good and bad on the authority of the Veda alone. 

The second reason – and it is this that is more weighty in an assessment of  the lived relations between Śaivism and Vaisika orthopraxy – is that the Mantramārga’s scriptures themselves insist that the rules of the Vaidika socio-religious  order are binding on Śaiva initiates. Śaivas were subject to that order at the time  of their initiation, and to the extent that they chose to continue to live within it  after their initiation they were enjoined to continue to adhere to its rules.35 


- 35. For this argument see Sadyojyotis, Nareśvaraparīkṣā, 3.74–76. I have emended yatnaṁ sarvaṁ karoti in 74b to yatnaṁ sarvaḥ karoti following Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s paraphrase in his commentary:  sarveṇa . . . yatno vidheyaḥ. 

That the Śaiva scriptures do indeed require this conformity is well illustrated  in the following passage, much cited by the commentators: So he should not transgress (na laṅghayet) the practices of his caste-class and  [Vaidika] discipline (varṇāśramācārān) even in thought (manasāpi). He should  remain (tiṣṭhet) in the discipline (āśrame) in which he was when he was initi ated into the Śaiva religion (dīkṣitaḥ śivaśāsane) and [at the same time] main tain the ordinances of Śiva (śivadharmaṁ ca pālayet).36 

- 36. This passage is cited, for example, by Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha, in his commentary on Nareśvaraparīkṣā 3.76. His father, Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha, cites it in his commentary on Mr̥gendratantra, Vidyāpada p. 63,  ll. 13–15, attributing to the Bhārgavottara, which has not, to my knowledge, survived. 

There is another respect in which the Vaidikas’ view of Śaivism and the Śai 
vas’ view of Vaidika religion were asymmetrical. For while the Vaidika tradition  made no attempt to justify its validity in Śaiva terms, the Śaivas, in their eagerness to establish themselves in what was by that time a fundamentally brahmanical society, attempted to persuade the orthoprax that the Śaiva corpus was valid  not only because it recognized the Vaidika ordinances as binding on all including  the Śaivas themselves but also by attempting to undermine the Vaidikas’ attacks  on the legitimacy of their religious practices by pointing to the abundant evidence of the promotion of the worship of Rudra or Śiva, by then considered one and the same, that is found both in Śruti texts and in the secondary Vaidika scriptures. 

Thus in his commentary on the Mr̥gendratantra the tenth-century Kash mirian Saiddhāntika Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha cites the presence of such practices  in the traditions of all four Vedas. The passage on which he is commenting is the  narrative introduction to the Tantra.37 

- 37. Vidyāpāda 1.2–6. 


In the hermitage of Badarī, Bharadvāja and other sages install an image of Śiva and undertake asceticism before it. The god Indra comes to the hermitage and asks them why they are not following the religion of the Veda (codanādharmaḥ). They reply that the method of propitiating Śiva with asceticism that they are following is indeed Vaidika and point  out (v. 6) that the Veda contains Mantras whose deity is Rudra and procedures  for causing him to come into one’s presence. In his commentary on this verse  Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha elaborates, citing a six-month-long ascetic procedure for  the summoning of Rudra into the propitiator’s presence taught in the now lost  Rudrakalpa that was a supplement (Pariśiṣṭa) of the Śrautasūtra of the Kāṭhaka  Yajurvedins, the use of the long Yajurvedic litany known as the Eleven Rudras  (rudraikādaśinī-saṁhitā), probably its recitation while one inundates the Liṅga  (rudrābhiṣekaḥ), a practice still current among the Taittirīya Yajurvedins in the Śiva temples of South India, sacrificial procedures using Mantras and chants of the r̥gveda and Sāmaveda found in the r̥gvidhāna and Sāmavidhāna, and proce dures for the propitiation of Rudra found in the Atharvavedic corpus. 

Similarly, in his commentary on Sadyojyotis’s Mokṣakārikā Bhaṭṭa  Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha’s son Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha turns to the corpus of secondary  Vaidika scriptures, arguing that these contain abundant historical evidence that  Śaivism was accepted by venerable figures of remote antiquity whose standing as  men learned in the Veda is beyond question. He cites the rule that Śaivas must  remain in their castes and life-disciplines, not transgressing the ordinances of  those institutions even in thought, and then addresses the Vaidikas as follows:38 

- 38. Mokṣakārikāvr̥tti on v. 146ab. 

> So this [teaching of Śiva] is not a forbidden form of religion (na pāṣaṇḍatvam)  even from your point of view [as Vaidikas]. This is because it does not conflict  with the Vedas, and because there is [Vaidika] scriptural evidence that it was  accepted by men learned in the Vedas. In the Purāṇas, the Mahābhārata,  and the like we learn that Śveta, Upamanyu, and other great sages under took religious practice within this [teaching of Śiva]. In the [Mahā]bhārata  we learn that Nara, Nārāyaṇa [=Arjuna and Vāsudeva], and Aśvatthāman  did the same, in the words ‘The god that you [Aśvatthāman] have worshipped  in an anthropomorphic image in every age those two have worshipped in the  Liṅga,’39 and also that it was by propitiating Śiva that the Lord Vāsudeva  achieved his goal in Suvarṇākṣa, as is related in the verse ‘O Kr̥ṣṇa, you will  be the man most dear to me in the world; and the whole world will turn to  face you [in adoration]. Of this there is no doubt,’ [and Paraśurāma received  the axe with which he slew Kārtavīrya.] 40 Moreover in the Smr̥tis we have  references to such pious acts for the benefit of the public (pūrto dharmaḥ)  as that of establishing a temple [of Śiva, as in] ‘He who makes a temple of  Śiva, built with baked bricks’ 41 and ‘in pious acts for the benefit of the public  one should know [that the reward is] liberation.’ 42 Then there is the evidence  of our own eyes in the form of the Pr̥thukeśvara [of Pr̥thu], the Rāmeśvara  [of Rāma], and [many] other [Śivas that have been installed in temples by  exemplary Vaidikas in ancient times]. Furthermore, the Veda confirms the  validity of the teaching of Śiva in such Upaniṣads as the Śvetāśvatara and in  Mantra-texts such as the Atharvaśiras. So none of the [three] faults that would  entail the invalidity [of the Śaiva scripture] from your point of view applies:  there is no disagreement [concerning the omniscience of Śiva, the creator of  
our scriptures], there is no lack of proof [of their validity], and they have not  been adopted by a small minority.43 

- 39. Mahābhārata 7.172.86cd. 
- 40. Mahābhārata 3.82.18; text and translation in brackets suspect at this point. 
- 41. Source not located. 
- 42. Varāhapurāṇa 170.33[c]d. The category of pious action termed pūrtam or pūrto dharmaḥ com prises such actions as establishing fountains, wells, step-wells, reservoirs, dams, and gardens, and  planting fruit trees and the like; the installing of deities; and the building and renovation of temples and  monasteries. See, e.g., Varāhapurāṇa 168.21; 170.33–58. 
- 43. These three faults are specified by Kumārīla in Ślokavārttika-Codanāsūtra 133 as reasons for rejecting the Buddhists’ argument that their claim that the Buddha, the author of their scriptures, was omniscient is proved by the existence of an unbroken tradition to that effect from his time to the  present. For a detailed discussion of this verse and the three that follow and their interpretation by Kumārīla’s commentators see Kataoka 2011, pt. 2, pp. 358–366. 

So Mantramārgic Śaivism, while claiming to transcend Brahmanism by offer ing true liberation, was nonetheless closely tied to it. It was the Vaidika world  rather than the Buddhist or the Jaina through which Śaivas rose to salvation; and  on their path thereto they continued to be bound by its rules, adding their Śaiva  obligations rather than substituting them for the Vaidika. They looked, more over, to the Vaidika scriptural corpus to provide proof of the validity of their own  scriptures. The evidence adduced as proof is not cogent, since none of it refers to  the specific practices of initiatory Śaivism; it refers only to forms of propitiation  that had long been part of Vaidika observance.+++(5)+++ Nonetheless, the attempt reveals  the concern of the Saiddhāntikas to be considered valid by the adherents of the  Vaidika tradition that they claimed to rise above. 
