+++
title = "०१"

+++
मूलम् [अत्र](https://archive.org/details/MaliniVijayottaraTantraEngTranslation1956VishnuDattShastri_201605/page/n143/mode/2up) ।

1. May the rays of the moon of wisdom (consoious ness) which have come out of the mouth of Paramose (siva) and which are capable of destroying the enemies of the Ultimate Reality (Parama siva) prevail. 

2, 3, 4 & 5. The Great sages, Sanatkumara, Sanaka, Sanatana, Sanandana, Narada, Agastya, Sanvarte and Vasista etc., inspired by the power of Siva, desiring to learn the great fact (the ultimate Reality) and much pleased, said to Kartikeya, who is slayer of Taraka, a demon, and who helps the people, sinking in the ocean of the world to cross it, on worshipping him duly- Sir, we have come to you with a desire to get success in the Yoga. The same cannot be achieved without Yoga. Kindly tell us the same.

6, 7. Kartikeya, whose inner soul is much pleased, on salut ing Mahesvara, who is the Lord of Ime, worshipped by Gods and giver or enjoyments and salvation, said (to the sagos) - please listen to me, I shall tell you Malini Vijayottara wh 10h 18 sprung up from the mouth of Paranosa (Siva). 

8, 9 & 10. Goddega Paravati, after paying galu tation to 31ya, who was sitting in his own place, saia 'You have told me the Siddhayogisvaritantra, consisting of nine crore vorses, which are class 11 led into the three parts. Again you have fully told me the path of yote la Malin vijayottara tantra, which have three eroro vorsee. You have also given me its summary in twelve hundred verses. 

30. 

11, 12. The sune vast (path of Yoga) cannot be grasped by the majority and thousanda or dull-minded . persons. Therefore, O Paranosvará, please tell no, after su ing it up in its oondonsod form so that it may puit! the dull minded people and wing all sorts of muodossos to them. The King of the World, Siva, thus told by tho Goddess, having laughed, said: 

13, 14, "Od svi, please listen to me. I would tell you Malini Vijayottara Tantra, which is not disolos od to anyone uptill now and which contains the theory or siddha Yogiavari Tantra.. 

| I have got this Tantra from Paramatman, who lo Aghora (not dreadful), long ago. Ona should, in reality, know the acceptable and avoidable material (from the Tantra above mentioned). 

15. The acceptable group consisting of the siz prinoiples: Siva, Sakti, Mantramahesvara, Mantra, Mantras vara and Anu (vijnanakala) 1(useful) to the aspirants, who are desirous of the fruits or Sivadva ita and they ought' to accept it. 

16. (There are throa varieties of Inpurity or Malin this Saiva philosophy. They are mentioned in this vors, and are said to be avoidable (Hoya). All these dirts are conneotod with the airrerent moasurora (Pramatra) and stand in the way of the realisation or their true nature as Siva). 

Mala wh loh simply means Anava Lala (related to 1 imited selt, anu) Karna Mala (rolated to Karma, deeds): Mayiya Mala (related to 11lusion, Maya) and all this 11lusive world is said to be avoidable croup. This group should dorinitely be known to be avoidable by sdahakas. 

21. 

17. On knowing the acceptable group and leaving aside the avoidable one, one cen obtain all sorts of success es. Among the zooeptable group Isa, Siva, is all doer, calm Omniscient and lord of all. 

18, 19, 20 & 21. Siva is inmenenent, transcendent and endless. Similarly His Sakti is also of the same kind. He, in the beginning, desiring to create the world, awakens the individual-selves whion are Vidy osvaras (possessing only one dirt). They are eight - Aghora, Paramaaghora, Chorarupa, Ghorgnana, Bhima, Bhisana Vamana and Pirana. Having appointed them, who are the doors of preservation, destruotion, protection and grace, as the Lantresvara and Mantramah esvara, he, like them, oreated soyon orores or Mantras with the dieties residing in them (s mandalas). 

22 & 23. All these great souled mantras are bring ers of all fruits. There are four kinds or Atman (Limited self) (the four kinds are Sakala, Pralayakala, vijnanakala and Mantra). (Out of these four, only two kinds are defined). The vijnanakala has only one Mala named Anava, Pralayakala has Karma Mala including the Anava Mala. Thus this Atma has two Malas, viz., Anava and Karma. (The third lowest and worst form of Atma, i.e., Sakala, which contain three Malas, has not been mentioned here). Dirt is said to bo nescience or ignorance, which is the cause or the need of the world. 

24. The good and the evil deeds produce pleasure and pain respectively. In accordance with the divine will, this limited soul (who is siva and who has assumed the form or the limited self) has the desire or enjoyment. . 

25. The King of the Mantras (siva), having entered Into His Maya Sakti with all His energies, created the world for the limited self which desire to get success in the enjoyment or the universe. 

26. That one, that is, all-parvading transcendental, fountain head of the world, without beginning and end, the Maya Sakti of siva, Isani is immune, from any change. 

27. This power of Maya Sakti creatod Kala-tattwa from which Purushatattva is born, which (Purushatattva) after getting the strength of doership, produced Vidya Tattva, i.e. impure Vidya, and Raga Tattva (attachment). 

28. Vidya (limited knowledge) makes the limited self (who is Siva) and distinguishes between the cause and its effect. The Raga (attachment or inalination), pleases the limited self with the pleasures of the Impure enjoyments. 

29. Niyati (limited desire) appoints the individual self to his own work. The Kala defined as the extent or two fingers and a quarter (tuti) presents before him (the Anu) division of space and place.

30. From Kalatattva, the Prakrti is formed, and from avyakta the Buddhi, possessing eight qualities is created  and from the Buddhi, consisting of eight Gunas, Ahankara formed. 

31. From light (tejas) mind the King of tha senses has sprung up. From the Vaikarika light, the (ten) senses are produced. From the third kind of light the Tanmatras are born. 

32. Ears, skin, eyes, tongue and nose, these aro five senses of knowledge. Speech, hands, the Anus, the Genitals and foot, these five are the senses of action. 
33. The whole world, from Kala to earth, the sea etc., by his own power, are changed by Siva. 

34. The same siva has created the difference of Kala eto., tattvas from the worlds (Bhuvana) for the sake of enjoyers who desire to have success in their enjoyment. 

35. Thus all the individual souls united with Tattvas beginnings from Kala upto tho end of Dhara Tattva (earth) should be known as "Sakalatman' by those who wish to avoid the state of Tattvas. 

36. All the Souls under the influence of the sakti of Siva, the nature of which is to conceal the whole universe in it, do movements in the world, which has three States viz. Ejection (srsti) stability (Sthiti) and destruction (Samhara). 

37. The Rudras, who are thumb-sized, have one hundred and eight varieties, owing to their doership everywhere in the world. 

38, 39. Being kind to Rudras (who create the whole universe and assume the form of seven measurers) siva, has openly appointed them to the rank of Mantresvara. The Mantresvaras, having found that the Brahma etc. are approaching them, give the fruit equal to their own strength, to three (Brahma etc.) who are desirous of enjoyment and salvation. The Brahma etc. who themselves are delivered, deliver seers - who again being great personalities, deliver Manvantas. 

40. (The sages) say that this is the knowledge of avoidable and aquaptable explained by Siva and is sufficient for the created world beginning from the Creator down to the earth. 

41. Three crores and a half Mantras appointed by Siva, after being kind to group of Anus, went to the eternal place. 

42. Thus in the course of time when the degraded Atman becomes able to be identical with Siva, this Atman is connected with the siva -Sakti which is quite calm and gives liberation. 

43. Some one when linked to Siva Sakti dies, while the other gets free from the nescience with which he is united. 

44. The Anu under the possession or Rudra Sakti and desirous of obtaining liberation is taken to a good teacher by the will of siva in order to got enjoyment and salvation. 

45. On worshipping the teacher and getting the initiation of Siva from him who is contented, the Anu (Sadhaka) at once dies and obtains the state or Siva or enjoys the Siva Yoga and realises Siva after death. 

46. (The aspirant) on getting the initiation or Yoga should practise it. He gets success in Yoga and eternal place in the end. 

47. The Anu when he reaches the highest place in accordance with this system never becomes Pasu and stands in the pure consciousness as a part and parcel of it. 

48. There are four kinds of Atman which again has four kinds - Sadhaka, Samayi, Putraka and Acarya. The Acarya among them is said to be pure. 

49. The Preceptor and Sadhaka should perform three sorts or deeds i.e. daily duties, duties related to some cause (Naimittika) and desireless deeds (Niskama). The other two Samayi and Putraka should only perform daily duties. 

50. The acceptable and avoidable knowledge is hereby explained. It is the best of all the knowable things. On knowing this, one gets all sorts of accomplishments. 
