+++
title = "०२"

+++

1. Now the detailed description of these categories, from the earth etc., is given systematically in an abbroviated form for the sake of Yogis to enable thom to achieve succes in Yoga. 

2. The earth (Tattva) is divided into two kinds, i.e., Saktiman (holder of power) and sakti (Power or energy), with the addition or its own form (individual existance), the Dhara Tattva should be known of fifteen kinds. 

3. The Saktimans are seven, from siva to Sakala. Similarly the wise people should know the Sakti is of seven kinds as the Saktiman is never without its Sakti. 

4. Thus, from water to the Prakrti tattva, all this group of the principles, should be known by people desiring to get their fruit, as divided by those fifteen kinds from one another. 

5. According to this very method, the Purusa tattva to Kala, should be town of thirteen kinds. The Pralaya kalas should be known of eleven kinds like the Rudrus (eleven). 

6. Similarly Maya Tattva should also te town of eleven binds. The Vijaana-kalau should be known of nine kinds. The Mantras are of seven kinds, while the Mantresvaras have five kinds. 

7. The Mantramahesvaras have three kinds. Siva cannot really be divided. If stated briefly, it is divisible. But when it is thought on its detail, it is endless. 

36. 

8. Thus the garland of the world, worshipped for the sake of Yoga, clearly divides by these kinds, should be known by the aspirants (Yogis) with a view to get success in the Yoga. 

9. O Parvati, one, who knows. (even) one of the tattvas and the worlds, attains the fruit of the Yoga. 

10. He, who rightly understands all the tattvas, is a Guru like myself and brings to light the power of the Mantras. 

11. The men, touched, talked and seen by the Yogi (who has got thorough knowledge of the tattvas and bhuvanas), whose mind is pleased , get rid of even their sins, committed in their previous seven births. 

12, The people, inspired by Siva, are initiated by the Yogi, and after getting the desired fruit, go to the place free from diseases. 

13. There is the entrance of the sakti of Rudra in the Man (who has got perfect knowledge or Siva-Yoga). In the appearance of the Sakti in the man, one should note the following marks. 

14. Tho first sign or the unifloation of the sakti is that the man (unified with the Sakti) is permanently devoted to Rudra. The second mark is that the man has Sun.988 in the Mantras which convince him of their fruit , 

atonoo. 

15. Thirdly thero is control over all tho oreation. Yourthly there is the accomplishment of the work mich 13 begun. 

16. Yirthly the beautiful pootio capacity, full of 

37. 

ornaments, is attained. 

L 

. 

Rudra Sakti) Bets, all of a sudden, ti 

wowwwe 

the scripturos. 

17. O Fair-raood, one Rudra-Sakti Samavesa is said to be five kinds, according to the divisions of the five elements (bhuta), tattva (thirty tattvas), Atma (limited self), Mantra and Sakti. 

18. The bhuta Samavesa is of five kinds as bhutas (Gross elements) are five. The tattva Samarasa is of thirty kinds. The Atma Samavesa has three varieties. The Mantra Samavesa is of ten kinds. 

19. As a mattor of fact, the Sakt Samavesa should be known or two kinds. This Samavesa is said to be or firty kinds. 

20. It is Anaya Bamavesa, tho Leties of whloh are mentioned. Similarly, the Sakti Samavosa should also be known of the game variaties. One should note that the Sambhava Samavega 18 also of the same kinds. 

21. Tha Anava 8 anavega 19 that whioh 13 oharaot ised by breath, Mudra, Meditation, Mantra (Varna) and oir oles (Cakra-six bodily centros). 

22. Whatever Samavosa 19 got by an aspirant, mod itating on a thing in his mind, without utteranos or a Mantra or control or breath, is said to be a Sakta Samavaya 

here. 

88. The Sama bhava Sanayega la that won an aspirant awakened by a teacher does not think of anything else oneopt siya. 

84. Systemat ioally all these kinds are one hundred 

38. 

In their dota 11ed form, they are 

and a half in brief. innumerable, 

26. Wiso non should not think that those dirrerent moans or Upayas yield dirferent fruits (though the ways to approach the 'Reality' aro various the fruit is one and the same). 

28. Wiso people should know the system or uniri. oation (sarvavesa Irama) a 1v 14 ed into the five states 4.a. waking (Jagrat). dreaming pleay (Syapsu) dreamless #loop (sukupt1) fourth (Turiya) and the state beyond the fourth (turiyat ita). 

3 

27. In the fifteen told method (Panoadasa vidhi) the object (Svarupa on whion the Sakala Pranata neditates, that is, the other Sakala or Sakalantara, the fakti (or the noasuror) and the measurer (Pranatr) himself are the waking state. 

28. Pralayakala Pranata and vijnanakala Pramata should be understood to be the dreaming and the dreamlegg states, respeotively. The Mantra, Mantrosvara and the Mantramahesvara Prematrs belong to the fourth state (Turya) 

89. O Fair-faced one, the energy of the Lord (Siya Sakti) and Siva Ainsoll belong to the State beyond tho . fourth (turiyat ita). 

80. In the thirteenfold method (trayodaga vidhi), the objoot (Svarupa) the sakala who was Pranata in the Penoadasa Vidhi and had a waking state in a waking atato 

(Jagrat). Pralayakala and Vijaanakala aro dreamy and dreamless gloop states, rospeotively. The Mantra, Mantra svara and Mantramahesvara have the fourth stato. Sakti and Siva have the state beyond the fourth.In the olovenfold method the object (Svarupa Pra layakala who was Pranata in the Tradosevidhi) la the waking state and both of the vijnanakala, 1.6.; V1Jnanakala Pramata and h18 Sakti are dreaming and dreaml888 sleep rospootively. 

31. Mantra, Mantrosvara and Mantramah @svara aro the fourth state and Sakti and Siva are the state beyond 

tho fourth. 

& 

In the ninafold method, the object (Svarupa Vijnana -kala who was Pranata in the elevenfold viani) is the waking state. The Mantra Pranata with his Sakti is the dreaming state. The Mantrasyara Pramata with his Sakti is the state of dreamless sloop. The Mantramahesvará Pramata with his Sakt i 18 tho fourth stato give with his sakti is the state beyond the fourth. 

38, 83. In the sevenfola method; the object (Svarupa) Mantra with his salt 1 (who was Pranata in the ninerold so hemo) is the waking state. Mantrosa with his Sakti is the dreaming state. Mantramaheavara with his Sakti dreamless state, Śiva with his Sakti is the fourth State, Siva (without Sakti) is the state beyond tho fourth. O Fair-bodied one, these five states should be mowa. In the five fold soience, the object (Svarupa Mantresvara with ! Sakti, (who was Pramata in the sevenfold vidhi) 19 the . waking state. The Sakti of Vantramahesvara is the dreaming state. The Mantramahesvara (the only Prenata without his Sakti) 18 the state of dreamless sleep. 'Siva with His'. Sakti is dreamless sleep stato. Siya with His Sakti is de the fourth state. The only Slve is the stato boyond the fourth. 

84, 38. In the threefold soience, the object : 

(Svarupa - the kriya Sakti of Mantra Mahesvara) 1a tho 

40. 

waking state. The Jnana Sakti of Mantramahesvara is dream ing state. The Iooha Sakti or the aforosa ia Pranata is dreamlosa aloep state. The only Mantramahesvara Pranata is the fourth state. The Siva Pramata with His Sakti is the state beyond the fourth. ' 

• Though siva apparently hes no division, still Ho is divided into five olassos. His first division is Kriya Sakti as He is the Master of activities (Vyapara-dhipa). His second division is actionlessness (Jnana Sakti-Tadahina 1.e. free from aotivities). The third division of Siva is Iocha Sakti (Preraka). The fourth division is Ananda Sakti (Iochantvrtti). His firth division is consciousness (cit Sakti, Svasthatva). 

In the rivofold division a bovo sitod, 1.6., waking dreaming eto. the rive olagses or Siva should be known. 

. 36. Aga in th. different kinds of tho nanes of these five states are olassified. The names of the waking state (Jagrat) are two, Pindastha (standing in the body) and Sarvato Bhadra (good from all sides). 

87. There are two names of the dreaming stato 1.2 Padashta (Lit. ataying in a place or in a spiritually high plac. ) and Vyapti (L1t. Pervasion). Similarly tho nanes of dreamless sleep state are also two, 1.0., Rupastha (Lit. staying in the real forma) and Mahavyapt(Lit. Great pervasion). 

38. The names of the fourth Turya) are said to be two, Praoaya (Lit. acoumulation) and Rupatita (Lit. beyond the form). Wise poople say that tho other pano of the state beyond the fourth (Turiyat Ita) 1o wlaha Praoaya" (Lit. great acomulation). 

41. 

39. Keeping in view the various Tattvas, this difference 18 said. Fear, as a matter of fact, all these Tattva, which are five in number. 

are I 

40. The Yoga of the bhuta tattvas, which is said to be done, 18 inoluded in the Pindastha state. The Padas tha stata refers to the Atmatattva. 

el 

41. Tho Mantra, Mantrosvara and Mantramah osvara Pramatrs are regarded as the Rupestha state. The Para Sakti which 18 active and inactive (or immanent and trans- . 

cendent) 18 mentioned as a Rupatita atate. 

42. Siva, who is without Phenomenal show, quios. cent, pure and independent, on mowing whom, ono la liberat ed, should be considered as Sarvatita (Beyond all). 

43. The Pindastha state is fourfold, that is, a buddha (11t. not awakened ) buddha (Lit. awakened ) pra buddha (Lit. awakened) and Suprabuddha (Lit. well-awakened). The Padastha state has also four kinds. They dre in the follow ing Sloka. 

44. Datagata (Lit. gone and come, that is, some times the spiritual realisation goes away from the aspirant and sometimes it cores. The Yogi is between tho unstable and the stable states of the mind. Teohnioally, it 10 call od "gavikalpaniavikalpavastha) Suvika ipta (Lit. well oolloot ed, Nirvikalpaka state) and susamahita (Lit. well establish od, that is pure nirvikalpaka stato). The Yogis choua also know the 'Rupastha' state or four kinds. 

48. The four kinds of Rupastha are:- U ita (Lit. riaen) Tipula (L1t, great) Senta (Lit. calm) and Suprasanna (Lit. much pleased). The other, 1.2. Rupatita has also four kinds: Manomana (Lit. beyond the approach of the mina) 

Ananta (Lit. endless, 1.. vent) darvartha (Lit. in whion all objects are included) and satatod ita (Lit., whish is constantly and forerar rison). In other words, that is state of Samadhi from which the Yogis never fall). 

46. The Mahaprasaya or Turyatita has no lind, that is the stat. of siva-Ranlisation. This is tho final and the highest state, in which only one Prino iplo siva remains. 

The five states of spiritual realisation are technically called 'Flve told road (Panoadha Adhva). the Throefold Path" (Tridha Adhva) is explained. 

Now 

47. Atma Tattva is upto vijnanakala. Vidya Tattva is upto. Isvara Tattva. The remaining 13 8lva Tattva. 

48. The road (Adhva, 1.e., Tattvadhva) alvided by the kinds above oited, is oplained. Now tho differences among the various roads (methods) is explained. 

49. The whole number of the prino iplas is divided into four kinds, which are technically called 'Eego (andas). They are:- parthiva aada (earthly 688), pralrta anda (mate rial ege) mayik anda and Saktio anda. In blot it is saia to be fourfold age. 

50, 51. The two groups of Parthiva anda 1.0. 

group of fivo gross @leonts and the other group of the five subtle elements (Tamatras), from which the axos, elements sanato, are not counted as a separato two groups. The first Parthiva anda is pervaded by the energy (Kala) the name of which is Dharika! (Lit.holdsr). In this Anda, tha Sadhaka should med itato on only one Tattvæ, 1.0., Prthivi Tattva, ono lettor, 'Køa one Pada consisting of one lotter and sixteen worlds beginning from Kulagni bhuvana upto the virabhadra bhuvana. 

58. This first ande, in which sixteon bhuvanas are mentioned is termed as 'sirroia Adkva' (Sadadhva). The second anda is pervaded by Apyapini (Lit. pleasing) Kala and the following principles should be noted thars: 

53. From water (Jala tattva) to naturo (Prakrti) Twenty three principles, lettery iron "Ta to Ha', five padas consisting of the five groups - ta, tha, pa, ya and sa, innumerable Mantras and fifty-six bhuvanas (aro found in tha Prakrta anda). 

54. Tho third Maya anda is pervaded by Bodhin. (1.1t. awakening) Kala. In this anda there are found roven prinoiples, from Purusa to Maya and tvanty sight bhuvanas, Boven letters from 'Cha' to 'N' Pedas two and Mantras also 

t70. 

55. The fourth sakta anda is parvaded by Utpuyini (Lit. purirying) Kala. The Yogis, in it, know thros tattvas, Su Vidya (Isavara Tattva and Sadasiva) three letters (Ka, Kha, Ga) one Mantra and one Pade. 

86. In brief, there are eighteen bhuvanas in this anda. The fifth anda (11 we call it anda but in roality it is not so beoause it is limitloss and the anda forn is limited) 1. said to be slya Tattve, which is quite calm and 18 pervaded by the Avakagada (giving space) Kala. 

57. There are sixtsen vowels, one Mantra and one Paia in it. Thus the sixfold road (Sadad hva) in its abbre viated for 1s explained. 

68. The whole world asrocomm) that is, puro' and Impure wanates from the macro coon (Brahmanda). Pherotoze the pure worlds are required and by then everything can be achieved 

59. O Noble one, the four lords, i.e., Brahma, Visnu Rudra and Isvara should be apprehended as the mastors of these four andas aforesaid.. 

60. The succeeding anda, if it 19 superior to the preceding one, in qualities, should be considered better and higher than the preceding one. Everything is ed to you. What do you want to ask now? 
