+++
title = "०३"

+++

1. Thus, being told by him (Siva) who gives Joy to the world, Parvati, having saluted the lord of the World, said as follows. 

2. All that you said, is all right and not other wise. I have understood it systematically from the beginning to the end as you have described it. 

8. O Paramesvara, now I wish to hear the words which denote Siva etc. You ought kindly to explain the same. 

4. In this way, requested by Parvati, Siva, who destroyes the mental as well as physical afflications of the universe, explained her the Mantras which have come to Him traditionally and which denote Siva, Sakti etc. 

5. The Sakti or energy of the Lord Siva which is said to be eternally related to Him, assumes the form of emotive power (Iccha Shakti) of Siva, when He desires to create the Universe. 

6, 7, 8, 9. Please hear, as this Sakti being one, becomes many. This thing should be known thus and not otherwise. 

The Sakti which conveys the idea above mentioned, is called the cognitive power (Jnana Sakti). 

"This thing was thus and now it should be thus". - The Sakti by which the above cited idea is expressed, is termed as oonative power (Kriya Sakti)! 

At first, this Sakti was of two- kinds, but again it has many varieties when it gets connected with innumerable objects. (Arthopadhi-vasat) like the Cintamani jewel. This Sakti, first of all, existing in the form of Matrka (the present Alphabet system of the Sanskrit literature) is divided. 

10. This Malini (having the form of a garland) Sakti is of two, nine and fifty kinds. The two kinds of it are Bija (seed) and Yoni which are said to be vowels and consonants respectively. 

11. The letters, La, Kha etc. are included in Yoni, which are classified into nine-groups. If tho alpha betical letters are considered separately and not 

grouped as we arrange them in Kavarga, Cavarga oto. classes 

then this Sakti hey fifty divisions as the alphabetical order contains fifty lotters. 

12. The seed is Salva here and His Sakti 15 Yoni (by which He funotions in the universe). It is the sakt 1 of Siva which is the denotor of all the thingo. 

13. In accordance with the order of Aghora eto. (one) should know the oight groups of the letters. Keep ing the kinds of sakti in view, the number of the sight groups includes the other group or @ight Saktis whion are Mahesvari sto. 

14. The latter group of the Saktis (oonn octed with the eight groups of the letters ) is as followo: - 

. 

46. 

1. Mahes1 (11t. related to Mahesa-Siva). . 2. Brahmani (lit. related to Braha-oreator). 3. Kaumari (lit. related to Kwara, son of Sankara). 4. Vaisnvi (lit. related to Vionu). 5. Endri (lit. related to Indra). 8. Yaraya. (lit. related to Yama). 7. Camunda (11t. dreadful and of Yogis! (ilt, the Yogis). 

15. O Pair-faoed one, the Creator (8 iva) has enumerated the fifty Saktis (in the form of the fifty , lettors) as donotive of the fifty Rudras. 

16. Sim 11 arly I shall tell you the whole number of the Saktis gystematically. Please listen to their kinds. 

17, 18, 19. (The nem eg of the sixteen Rudras, who pervado tho sixteen vowels are given below). 

0 

1, Averta (11t. Nectar). 2. Amrtapurna (Lit. Pull of neotar). 3. Amrta bha (Lit. whose radiance is liko nectar). 4. Amrtadrava (Lit. from which Nectar oozes). 8. Amrtaugh (Lit. store-house or neotar). 8. Amrtromi (Lit. a wave or ambrosia). 7. Amrtasyandana (Lit. from whom ambrosia flows). 8. Amrtanga (Lit. whose limbs are made or Wectar). 9. Amrtavapu (I.lt. whose body is made of nectar). 10. Amrtodgara (Lit. from whom Nectar springe). 11. Amrtugyu (Lit. whose face is like nootar). 18. Avrtatanu (Lit. whose body is like nootar). 13. Amrtadecana (Lit. who sprinkles noctar). 14. Amrtamurti (Lit. who has the form of neotar). 15. Amrtosa (Lit. Lord or near) and 

16. Sarvamrtadhera (Lit. who possesses all neotars). 

7. 

These sirtoon Rudras have come out of the seed which la 

Rudra. 

20, 21, 22, 23, 24. (Tho other names of the thirty-four Rudres who pervade the thirty-four lotters beginning from Ka to Ksa era mentioned as follows: 

1. Jaya (Lit. conquest). 2. Vijaya (Lit. a special conquest). 8. Jayanta (Lit. conquering). 4. Aparajita (Lit. not defeated). 5. Sujaya (Lit. a good conquest). 8. Jayarudra (Lit. Rudras full of conquest). 7. Jayakirti (Lit, whosa rama 1g conquest). 8. Jayavaha (Lit. who brings conquest). 9. Jayamurti (Lit. whose form is conquest). 10. Jayotgaha (Lit. whose courage is conquest). 11. Jayada (Lit. givar or conquest). 12. Jayavardhana (Lit. who increases conquest). 13. Bala (Lit. strong). 14. Atibala (Lit. who brings strength). 15. (Bala Bhadru (Lit..good among the strong things). 16. Bala Prada (Lit. giver of strength). 17. Balavahe (Lit. who brings strength). 18. Balvan (Lit, strong). 19. Baladata (Lit. giver or strength). 20. Balesvara (Lit. Lord of strong men). 21, Nandana (Lit. who pleases). 22. Sarvatobhadra (Lit. augpioious from all sides). 23. Bhadra Murti (Lit. whose form is beautiful). 24. Sivaprada (Lit. Giver of good). 25. Sumana (Lit. having good mind ). 26. Sprhana (Lit. who is desired). 

A 

A 

A 

UUUUU 

27. Durga (Lit. fort that is 20cessible with great 

: 

48. 

difficulty). 28. Bhadrakala (Lit. to whom doath iu doar). 29. Manonuga (Lit. who followa mind). . 30. Kausika (Lit. '187anitra, a saer). 31. Kala (Lit. death). 32. Visvega (Lit. Lord of the World). 33. Susiva (Lit. who is highly auspio lous) and 34. Kopa (Lit, ang er 1.e. who is full of anger). 

These thirty-four Rudras are sprung up from the Yon which consists of the thirty-four letters from Ka to Koy. All these Rudras above o Ited, are expressed in the feminine gender, such as Anrta, Jaya, eto, are fifty saktis. 

25. There is no fixed number or the Mantrag 

produo ed from the smed and Yoni containing Rudra and Sakti in them because both are endless, 

26. Parama siva awakened Siva (Ananta) by His own will, which 18 desor 1 bed above and which contains all Sastras in it. 

27. Siva (Ananta), awakened by the free will or Parana Siva, arter stimulating tho Yoni (tros will) by His own Saktis, has created the letters of the same number, which similarly contain Velay in then. 

28. O one, worshipped by hundreds, (the Mantras) embracar by those letters, mhioh fulrll all tho dosirea of mankind, never become otherwise to the westers of the soekers (Sadhaka). 

89. The universe of the gods as well as or the men is pervaded by them (letters). From the all Sastras and Vedas emanate oontinuously. 

30. The great-souled Sakti of Siva is endless.49. 

Keaping the funotion of it in viow, it has three divisions, 

31. More dreadful Sakt is, which, on cubrao ing the Anus, the individual selves, who are inolined towards the material objeots, make the fall down and down, aro: said to be 'Aparas'. 

32. The dreadful Saktis, which like the previous ones, create the inolination towards the fruits of the mixed deeds in the Anus and obstruot the way of their 

11beration, are mentioned as 'Paraparas', 

33. 8 im 1larly, the Saktis, bringing the abode or Siva as a fruit to the mass of people, are called (Paras) by men who know the Sakti Tattva, which are the powers or Siva (Siva Saktayah) and which are not dreadful (11ke those previously mentioned). 

34. (Keeping their orrices in viow) the Saktis, which have got the possession of all the individual selves, are explained to you. As a matter of fact, there is only one Sakti or Siva. 

38. For the sake of those who follow the Lantras and Tantras in order to get choson fruit, anothor form of this Sakti, which has got many divisions, 18 doscribed. 

36. The lower of the Mantras, in the works or the Nyasa, which are devoid of all the particular methods, should make the Nyaga of the Malini Sakti which is Bhinna yoni, for making the body of the Sakti. 

37. The na letter should be used for 9ikha . R, R, Lr and Lr should be used for siromala, that is, for Western, Northern, Southern and the Eastern fao@respective ly. The letter tha. should be used for the upper race. 'Cha' should be used for øye in the forehead and Dha. for 

50. 

the ordinary two eyes. 'I' should be used for the nose and inu' for the cars (The hole in the ears) wu" *u* ghould be used for the right and the left outer form of the ear. 

38. 'Ball should be used for the mouth "ka! 'Iha Ga Gha' and N should be used for teeth. I' wad should be used for tongue and speech rospeotively. Vai Bha and Ya should be used for throat, right shouldor and left shoulder respectively. 'Da' and 'Dha! should be used for the right and loft arn. 

59. "Tha. should be used for two hands, Gha and Na should be used for the fingers of the right and the left hands, respeotively. 'Pa' Sa and La should bo used for heart, right breast and the left breast respectively. a and sa and oh should be used for the milk, Jiva and individual olf (Pranatman) respectively. 

40, 41. 'Na' sa' and 'Ksashould be used for the vital force (Prana, belly and navel respectively) *Ua' and 'sa 'Am and Ta' should be used for walet, privata organ, semen (Sukra) and the Vedhra (Phallus) respectively. for the right and the left knees, the right leg, loft leg, right foot and the left foot, ®, ai, o, au, a and ita should be used respectively. Please listen to the secret knowledge (Vidya) and the formation of the Mantras as they are made. (In the following verses it is pointed out to make (axu-ddharana) the Mantras of the three Vidyas, mentioned in the above vorso, Parapara, Apara and Para, by the letters used for Anganyasa. Firstly tho Parapara Mantra is made of the letters pointed out by referring to the various parts of the body, which are the symbols of the lattors). 

48. For the right log, in the Malini Anganyasa, 

51. 

Ho! 18 used. Thus or should be taken, accompanied by a dot (Anuswara). The whole form is 'Om'. Then the letter, used for speech (Vac) should be taken, which is al. The letter of the fourth tooth is gha' and it should be com bined with the leg 1.e. the letter used for leg, which is to the whole form will be as aghol. . 

* 43. By Danda neans. 'r' which is to be combined with the right knee, 1.e. (E). Thus it should be read as Ro. By Prana and Danda mean 'I' and 'R'. Both of them should be combined with '1' whion should be read out as *Hri' (Anghri) Danda' and 'Kati', 1.0. (a) (R) and (ma) should be placed separately (Dvija) and D should be as before, 1... (Chore). (The whole epithet mentioned in these two 'Slokas is 'Om Aghore Ari D.R. I Chore"). 

44. Prana means 'I' and it should be accompanied by a dot (Anuswara) the form of whioh is Ham'. Again the tooth, 1,., mentioned in the 42nd verse 'Gho should be taken. Then only Danda, 1.6. 'R' should be put down.' 

be takon. 

45. Heart, 1.6. 'p' with '' (Daksajanu) shouia be taken. 'H' (Prana) with 'Sa (Jivatman) should be put down, both of the letters would be read as 'Hasa'. Then again the tooth (Cho) and only 'R' should be put down as 

Chora 

46. 'Nitamba' means hora Kati(Walst) by which the lotter 'M' is to be taken and it should be combined with 

U (Daksamudra). After it, the second tooth 1.e. h'.. with '11 (tongue) should be taken. 'Daksa Sithara' means 

Bha' with which '1' (Nasa) should be inserted. It should be followed by 'ma' (Nitamba). All the letters mentioned 

52. 

here are "Mukhi' and Bhima'.. 

LE 

47. Again the letter Bha. (sikhara) should be taken and then 's a' (belly) should put down. 'V' shoula be combined with 'e' (both of the letters are pointed out hereby (Karna) and (Daksa Šanu). Then the letter "a" (Kantha) should be taken only. 

48. Then only 'ma' (Nitam ba ) should be placed.. The letters P. (heart) and (i' (tongue) shouia be taken, which make the epithet (Piva). Then the lottor "ba" (mout. should be taken with 'H' (Prana) ana E (the right knee): 

49. Then the four letters 'gpi 'bh and 'ya should be taken (rour Sula Dandas) two of them should be put together as (fra). In the end, 'Pha' (the left foot) and 'Ta' (Kapala) without vowel should be placed, which run as und er: - Phat'. 

3 

5 0. After it, the epithet (Aghora) as it is used in the beginning, should be uttered. This is the Para para Vidya. Apara 15 going to be said. 

51. (Aghora) should be uttered in the beginning. Then '' (Prana) with dot (Anuswara) and 'u' (Vama Mudra). should be taken which is 'Hum'. Then all the letters from Ka to Pa should be uttered with the epithet "Aghoro' in the 

end. 

52. A para is explainsd. Please listen to Para whion is the Sakti or Rudra and by the nero uttorando of which all the Mantras come before (the aspirant). 

SORIA 

53. The body of the man, who has got tho know ledge of the Para, trembles and ho flies atondo. Making of the special postures of the body, singing and weeping 11ke the reale jaokal are at his a isposal. 

53. 

84. The man (who has got the accomplishment of this Sakti) is able to say the past happenings and the happenings which did not happen yet. The traditional 'g(Jiva) should be combined with the fau' (Vemajangha) which runs as follows: - "Sauh'. 

55. It is Para Vidya and it yields desires. This knowledge should not be given to one who is not a igo iple and devotee. 

56. Siva, Sakti of Siva and the trachor aro equal to one, who 8963 then with devotion, o fair-faced one, this knowledge should be given. . 

57. The also iple should algo learn this vidys from the teacher when he has entirely satisfied the latter with his own body, matorials, learning, purir loation, his good deeds and good qualities ato. 

58. This Vidya also, when it is duly learned from the teacher, whose mind is pleased, yields fruit not other wise o one, saluted by, brave people. 

59, 60, 61. There are eight Yoginis (female atten dants on Siva) wh loh havo oome out of the limbs of the Paraparadevi. There are twenty sight letters (5 plus 8 plus 5 plus 4 plus 2 plus 5 plus & plus plus b = 20) in it. Nineteen lettera of Apara should be understood. The letters with the help of the sixlong vowels and dots (Anuswara), makes the bodies or the three Vidyas, 1.e. Parapara, Apara and Para. The mouths of the thrco Vidyes are made of the 's! with the five short vowels. Tho in Aertion of the rive Omkars with the latter so is the Mantra of the Vidyas which also works like thoir vary' heart. 

54. 

, 

62. O my darling, the Mantra, 'om Amrto Tojonalini 9waha' consisting of the eleven letters, 1s, called Brahma stras', which literally means the head of tho Brahm (Supreme Reality). 

63. The Mantra Om Vedavedini kim Phat" consist ins of the eight letters is called "Rudraniand has been termed as 'sikha' (Furt) of the three Vidyas. 

64. The Mantra om vejrine Vajrad haraya Swaha! consisting of the elevon letters is said to be "Purustuta' and stands as the armour (Varma) or the Vidyas. 

65. The Mantra 'Bhave 911 pagu Hum Phat.cond lat ing of seven and half letters has been torned as "Pagupata which is highly useful (Para).. 

68. The letters 'I' 'R' T 'K and 'yo with the long vowels (A) and a dot (Anuswara) are called 'Astra mantra.'. If the same letters are combined with short vowel 'a' and anuswars, they would be the Hantras of the Indra and others. 

YOW 

inuswers 

87. The letter (I) and (a) should be imagined as Visnu and Prajapati. The first vowel !at and the third vowel '1' denote the Padma 'lotus' and Calra (diso) or tho Vid yas. 

88. This group of the Matrkas, yield ing all sorts of desires has been explained for the sake of the Yogis to enable them to achieve success in Yoga. Vow what do you want to ask ye? 
