+++
title = "०४"

+++

1. The Meditators (Uunis), with their glad oyos, on hearing it and salut ing Kartikeya, said the following: 

55. 

2. Why did Sivu say the definition or tho Mantra when he was aslced by Parvati to relate the mathod of the Yoga-Philosophy and when he also promised to do the sano? 

8. Thus, asked Kartikeya, who was a man or great Intelligenoe, in order to remove their doubts, said the following: 

4. (The wise people) say that the unirioation or oneness of one thing with another is Yoga. This Yoga is as an only knowable thing so that ons may sucoeed in over coming the avoidable (Heya) thing. 

5. The twofold knowledge (Jneya or Upadeya and Heya) cannot be distinguished without the help of Jnana (knowledge). 'Siva has explained for the sake or above mentioned (twofold knowledge). 

6. The definition of the Mantra sufrioos for the suocess in Yoga with its seeds (roots) but without initia tion, there is no competency for Sankara-Yoga. 

7. The initiation is of two kinds, - Kriya Diksa and Jnana Diksa. It is explained by him that both of the initiations should be performed. 

8. By performance of only one initiation, a man is not competent to enter into the Saiya Yoga. A man becomas competent to have liberation and Mantra by the initiation of Siya Yoga. 

9. On hearing this saying of Siva, my mother, 

whoso hair was stand iag on and, o best of all the ladi tators (Munies), (Kartikeya) said the following: 

10. The existence of the categories, worldo, 

Kalas, Padas and Mantras in the body of the Malini, who 

56.. 

is abhinna (not broken) 15 systematically loonut. 

11. O Deva, you have said to me tho Dhinnayoni Yalini. Now I wish to know how these Tattvas and Bhuvanas eto. are found in it. Please tell me the same. 

12, 13. Thus, asked by Vahad evi, Bhairava, xiyor of numerous enjoyments, who has beautified the spaces or the directions by the rays or the shining moon and whose order is obeyed by the Lines, of the orowns put on the heads of the Gods, as well as demons, said the following sweet words, the meaning of which is not difficult to understand. 

14. O Devi, how all this atands in tho parts or the body of the Malini, which I said to you as Bhinnayoni, I shall szple in the same to you. 

15. In the letter Pha! the earth #tattva. 13 said to be found bystematically, to the group of the letters bo ginning from 'da' to 'Jha', the twenty-three Tattvas begin ning from water' tattra and ending in the Prakrti Tattya are found. 

18. In ths geven letters begianing from the "Tha! onward, the seven Tattvas from Purusa onward and in the e 'n' and 'Gha' the three tattvas from Su-Vidya to Sada Siva tattvas (in ascend ing order') should be understood. 

17, 18. In Siva Tattva the sixteen lottor Cha. to 'N' should be known. 

Accord ing to the number of the tattvas, o beauti ful one, Kalas, Padas, Mantras and the worlda phoula bo known to be divided into the Tattvas above mention 2, E3 it is already paid. Now plaaso llaten to the division.ch the letters and Padas accora ing to the division or the three Vidyas. 

57 

19. (The aspirant) should know one Pada consisting of one letter 1.0. aun, in tranacendental tattva (sive Uskala) tha timo Pad as of three letters and ono. lotter, 'i.c. 

Ighora (1t contains three letters) Erin (It contains one letter) in Sadasiva tattva and two Padas of five letters and one letter 1.9. Parama Ghore (containing rive letters) Hum (it contains one lettør) in Isvara Tattva and Sudaha 

Vidya. 

20. (He should know) the Pades of four letters and one Pada of one letter 1.e. 'ahora Rupa (four lettered peda) Hah (one lettered Pada) in the three tattvas, i.e., Maya, Kala, Agudahavidya, one Pada of four letters 1.8. 

Ghora Mukhi (It has four lettera) in two tettvag, viz., Kula and Niyati. 

21. In Raga Tattva, one Pada or two letters 1.0. Bhims and in Prakrti tattva, one Pada ot three lotters 1.0. Bhigane should be known. In intelligence (Budanitattva) as it pervades the group of the eight Devatas the Pada or two letterg 1... 'Vama' should be realised. 

22. As the five groups of the eight words (mention ed in the 14th verse of the 5th Adhikara of Malini) pervado the Tattres, auch as four gross alements (earth Tattva is not included in them). Five tarmatras (subtle oleaents). five senses of action, rive organs of knowledge, mind and Ahankaro (pride). Therefore, in these Tattvegas, the Padas oonsisting of two letters (Piva), one letter (H0), two letters (Ru Ru), two letters (Ra Ra) and one letter and a halt (Phat) should be known. 

28. In the earth principle, thrae Pedas of ono letter (Hun) one letter (Bah) and one and a hair lottor (Phat) should be known. 

58. 

All the Bhuvanga (Puranga) letters, Mantras and Kalas oto. should bo lanowa ag they are already nontioned. 

24. In the reverse order the two egeu (and as). 1.e. Parthiva and Prakrta anda, are pervaded by one letter and a half and the two and as separately (Maya and Sakta enda) are perraded by one and one lettored Pada respeotively 

25. The letter 's' pervados the three anda. 1.0. Parthiva, Prakrta and Maya anda. The fourth anda, that is, Sakta, is perveded by the letter au (Trisula, lit. trident and the whole beyond the four andne is covered by the Visarga. It is the pervasion of the Para Mantra. 

26. All this (above mentioned ) should be parti. cularly known by the Sadhaka doairing his own well being and that of others, otherwise, that (three paths) can not be obtained. 

27. O Parvati, both of Jnani and Yogi should be known as 'the giver or liberation but the two kinds or theiu should be understood separately by the peakers, desirous or the fruits. 

28. Knowledge 18 said to be threo kinds. The Pirgt kind , Sruta (lit. heard), the second Cintamaya full of anxiety) and the third kind is Bhavanapaya (Lit meditative). 

29, 30. The Sruta (lit, heard) is that which con tains the knowledge of the soripturos, spread to and fros. This is here and that is there. It would be usorul here in this way. Tho jnana after due and systematio consider ation or the soriptures determined, is called Ointazaya, which has two kinds. 

31. The two kinds of Cintamaya are Vanda (11t. 

PL59. 

.. 

slow) and actually experience Sve bhyasta (Lit. octually ox perienood). When the Svabhyaste 18 perfeotly accomplished , it assumes the position of the 'Bhavanamaya'. 

38. In the state or Bhavanamaya 'Yogi, after do ing the Yogio praot 1oes, gets its fruita. Kesping the dirferonoes of knowledge in view, Jnani is said to be or four Ar kinds. 

33. Samprapta (Lit. got, achieved ) ghatmana (Lit. under the process of being a parroot Yogi) siddha (Lit. who achieved quod ess) and giddhatama (Lit. who has perfeótly achieved suocess) are the four kinds of yogi. Parvati, Yogi also gots these stages accord ingly. 

24, 35, 86. Yoga is also or three kinds, like the Samayega (coalgoence). The first kind of it 1g Prapto padesa (Lit. who has got advios), which has again three kinds. The Broad minded persons define that the state of mind which doviates from the Reality (tattva) but the soeker often devotes it to the Tattva, is' &hetamana. 

37. 8iddha Yoga is that when the Yogi does not meditate on the other subject than the Roality. 

38. That one, who stand ing in my place in any cond it ion and enjoying the fruits of his Yoga, uover parts. with his stage (occupied by Yoga) shoula' be understood as Sus 100ha. Omy Darling, he is like myself. 

39. The importance of the latter is said to be greater than that of the preosa ing one. Sugiadha is best of all the Jnania and Yogie. 

40. Booause this Susidaha has algo mowledge, 

devoid of the fruits of the previous Yogio activitico. Ho 1s said to be the giver of liberation and he has the 12.00 

-1.edge or his own experience. 

41. All this knowledge in brior, collooted from 

the other Tantres, has been given to you, whloh is useful to the Yogis, o You, who are worshipped by Yogis... 

STRETCH 
