+++
title = "०६"

+++

1. How tho phenomenal universe, 1.0, thirty-13 prinoiples, 13 realised in this microoosma (deba) in the." 

initiation of knowledge, it is now explained. 

2. Witha as much space ag two fingers can covor, 

VILA SP 

here, 

. 

LU 

64. 

(the aspirant) should place (Nyasa) his hend on the five elements below the foot. The earth prino iple should be understood upto the ankle (which means tour fingers), from thére, systemat toally, the water etc. elements should be thought with the two ringers' spaco. 

3. Similarly from that placé onward upto the throat (Kantha Kupa) the group of the six tattvas, 1.e. 

from purusa to Kala, should be moditated upon. 

4. After that, the aspirant, who has controlled himself (Sus anahita) should med itate upon the four princi ples beginning from Maya to Sadasiva with the pervasion or four fingers. 

5. After that (The Sadhaka) should nsa itato on Siva Tattva which is orfulgent, free from worries and anxieties, pervading all and existing inside as well as outside the body. 

8. This Nyasa (plao ing of tho fingers of the rig. hand on the different parts of the body) contains thirtyai prinoiples and 18 said to be Tattvenyesa (which means cons id eration of the thirtysix principles in this body (Ks udra Brahmanda -Microcogn). The Nayasa 1s termed as Panoatattva Nyasa. 

7. The remaining portion systematically above th navol upto six fingers 1s porvaded by water and the spaoe 

(four fingers) upto the ankle is covered by the earth. 

8. Above this space, twentytwo fingers' space i covered by fire (Tejas). The pervasion of the wind is sa to be of twelve fingers. 

9. (The aspirant) should nod itate upon the sky which is ultimate, calm and whion pervades a1l. A simila 

65. 

prooedure should be applied (Isyate) to the livefold path consisting of Sakti eto. (Sakti, Sadasiva, Isvara, Su Vidya, and Maya Tattva in descend ing order). 

10. In the threofold Nayage, the Atua Tattva 19 gaid to be upto the throat (whioh means soventy vo fingers from feet to throat). Above this, there is Viaya Tattve, which covers the space of twelve fingers. The Slva Tattva, as it is already mentioned, pervades the whole body. . 

11. 12. Thus the tattva nyaga is explained. Bhuvanadhya Nyasa is going to be explained in the same way. The sixteen worlds, from Kalagni to Virabhadra (should be und erstood) upto the Ankle, i.e. In the space or four fingers (The sadhakas) should do their Nyasa systematically and attentively with the pervasion of one fingers' spado from Lakulisa. 

13. To Dvirandabhuvana, (Sadhaka) ought to do the Nyasa or 39 worlds in thirtynine fingers. Tho Chagalanda 

bhuvana covers the space of the throe ringoro. 

Arter that, the groups, consisting of cight Devas (Devastaka) (should be understood in the four fingers space) with the pervasion of one fourth of the ringer. 

14. Systematically the group for the six worlds (should be known in the space of three fingers) with the pervasion of hall ringer. The group of the tour world dovers the space of two fingers. One and one Bhuvana should be known in one and one ringer. 

15. There are two worlds in everyone of the threa tattvas from Vidya to Maya (1.m., Vidya Kala, Yaya). The first wrld in these Tattvas covers the space of ono ringor while the next to the first has two fingoro augeo (thus 

everyone of these tattvas covers the space covored by these prino 1ples is nine fingers). Tho worlds found 1x Kala Tattva cover one finger's space cach.. 

18. The Bhuvanas, Kandaladhipatis, etc., (which are eight in number) have four fingers space, 1.e. overyono of the Bhuvanas has a half finger'g space. The other group or the three Bhuvanas (Halahala Rudra and Krodha) has two fingers' space oollectively, 1.0., Gve 10 of them has 2/3 space of the ringer. 

17. The group of the five Bhuvans has the full space of two fingers. The other group of the olght Bhuvans has the space of four fingers (It should be noted bero that one group of the rive worlds has 2 lingers space). Sini larly the other group of the five worlds will also have the space of two ringers. Thus in the text, ons should note the word (Anyat), which means the other Pancaka denoting the number two. Thus Panoaka and Anyat Pancalca nenn four fingers' space which is covered by the group of the might Bhuvanas. 

18. In this Bhuvanad hva-Nyasa, 23 it 19 already cited, Slva Tattya pervados all and should be meditated on in the same way. 

According to the twofola division, (1.0. Varna and the Mantra or the Vidyas-Varga bhaga and Vidya Bhaga) there are two kinds or Padas viz., Varna or Varga Pada and Vidya Pada or Mantra Peda. 

19. Listen to the pervasion of the Varga (Varna). 

as they pervado the body 11ko Mantras. The first group (Varga) 1.e., from 'a' to Visarga, covers the spaco or four fingers, 1.e., from feet to anklo. The other two groupe, 1.e., Kavarga and Cavarga each occupy the epado of oight 

67. 

fingers. 

80. The three groups, 1.0., Tavarga, Tavarga and . Pavarga each covers the gpece of ten fingers. Yavarga has the space or fifteen fingers. The Saverga has the space of nineteen fingers. The ninth group, 110., Kua' 13 a great pervader of all. 

21. The pervasion of the Padas, having zinoteau varieties is going to be explained. The first threm Padas, each, have two fingers' space in the body. Thus the three Pedas ocoupy the space of six fingers in the body. 

22. The four padas (everyone or them) have the space of might fingers. The other one has the space of ten fingers. The two Padas have two fingersø space. The other one has six fingers space. 

23. The other one has the space of twelve fingers. The other two Padas, Bach, cover the space of five fingers. The two Padas have four fingers' space. The other two Padas have the space of two ringars. : 

84. The nineteenth pada i, pervasivo or all." The method (Vidhi) a bove mentioned is (teobnically tamsa as 'Aparavidhi'. After this, hear the other mothod, which is technically called 'Pare Para vidhi' or the Hothod of 

Paraparu. 

25. (In Parapara method, the whole body is consi dered to be of ninetysix fingers and divided into two parts, 1.e., from feet to forehead eighty-four fingers and twolvo .. fingers from forehead to skull (Brahanarandhra). Thus the Sadhaka has to perform the Anganyasa in 98 eingers). 

As already said, the aspirant should know the oarth Tattva in four ringers and from water upto the 

*** 

68. 68. 

Buddhi Tattva, viz. water fire, wind, sky, the five qua. 11ties of the gross elements, technically torned us live Tanna tras (Subtle elements - odour, tanto, light, touch and sound), the tivo organs of action and live organs or sense, the mind, Ahankara (egoism) and Budani, each, have the space or twofingers and half. 

28. The pervasion of Prakrti should be imow to be of three fingers. All tho remaining Tattvas ghould be understood as before, 

in the Para methoá (Parayidhi) earth Tattva has four fingers and the other Tattva from water to Buddhi each cover the space of three fingers. 

27. The Prakrti tattve oovers the space of four fingers and the other tattvas are as before. 

Inspite of two divisions of letters, they have sixfold division. 

28. In accordance with the previous brief mention the division of the Pada, Mantra and Kala ahould be lonown along with the Tattvedhva in reality. 

29. (The Sadhaka) should do the threefold division of all prino iples, according to the way cited in the Tattva and letters. Thus the preceptor who is really in the form of Siva should do the initiation of the disciple whogo body 19 supposed to be of 84, 96, 108 fingers in apara, parapara and para vidhi, respectively. 
