+++
title = "०७"

+++
SEVENTH ADRIKARA. 

1. After this, I shall explain the energiek of Lord Siva the names of which ara Mudrag and whereby proteoted the Sadhaka (Mantri) who recites out Mantra,69. 

achieves success in Mantrag. (The names of the various Mudras are mentioned in the following verges). 

2, 3 and 4. Trisula, Padma Bakti, Calra , Bajraka, Danda, Damstra Mahapreta, Mahamudra, Khagesvari, Manodaya, Kerala, Khatvanga, Kapala, Hala, Papankusa, Chanta, lua cara, Trig ikha, Avaha, Sthapani Rodha, Dravyadá, Nati, Anita and Yogamudra, should be o' worahipped by the bravemon Imotra: Mudra. 

5. Trisula (Lit. Tridont) Mudra is that when tho first, the second and the third fingers spread straight and are attached to the fourth finger and tho thub. 

O 

O 

6, 7, 8 and 9. The aspirant should show the Padma Mudra, by making hands in the form of a lotus. 

Kawari Sakti 1.e. Sakti Mudra is that when the midmost fingers are directly attached to the hands which have concealed the fingers. The fist of the right hand should be taken over the fist of the left hand which is opened. The lert f 1st should be prassed by the right 11st. It is Cakra Mudra. 

One should place the right hand, the palm of which 18 downward on the left hand, the palm or which is outwarde, the fourth fingers and thumb should be attached wh110 tho other fingers should go to the wrist (this posturo of the hand) is known asa Aindri or bajra Mudra, which cives contentment. 

10. Onward the spread right fist inolud ing tao interior of the thumb is Dandamudra and is door to-Vaivee vata family. 

11. When the fourth finger of the list of the left hand la bent towards the left side, it is termed Danstra, 

- 

70. 

which ploasoe the family of Damunda Devi.. 

. 

19, 13. When the right foot is placed on the left knee, hands are turned to the back side, syes are disordered neck appears as it 18 broken and the tonguo is spread out ward, it is oalled Vahapreta. As it is dear to all Yogis henoe, it is also called "Yogisvari". 

14, 15, 16, 17, 18, and 19. Tho ampirant shoula take his hands, which are turned down, through his feet to his heart. Then he should take them straight abovo the face. This posture is called Maha Pudra and is well know for the purification of the body. For the aco cmplishment of Yoga, this Mudra doos all works of Yogis. 

The Sadhaka on sitting on Padma posture (Padma - sana) should cono entrate his mind on the navel. Then 'ho should take mind, in the form of a stiok to tho palato between the two eyebrows and gkull (Brahmarandhra). Having controlled the same there, he should guide 16 through the palate, the space between two eye brows and the skull.. On doing this Mudra, the great aspirant can fly in the sky. 

On the right hand which is turned down, the left hand should be placed then the third and the second finger of the right hand should be pressed by the thumb of the lait hend. The second finger should press the fourth finger and the fourth finger should proga tho 2ooond one. The thumb of the right hand should be pressed by tho sqoond . and the third fingers of the left hand. The nexo or this Mudra is Mahodaya, which bringa prosperity to mon.. 

20, 21, 22, 23, 24. The aspirant (lantri) should pierce the corners (Srkkani) or his mouth by tho ring ringer as well as the little finger and at the same tino ne should move his tongue and make loud va111ng, This 

71. 

Mudra or angry appearanco 18 Karala and frightens the wicked 

men. 

The first of the left hand, whioh 18 a bit raised, should be placed on the left shoulder. This Mudra is called Khatvanga. Now listen to the Kapala Mudra. When the right hand, the fingers or which are a.. bit contracted, is turned down, it is Kapala Mudra-Vow Hala Mudra is to be explained. 

When the foreringer of the list of the right hana 18 caught by the foreringer of the fist of tho lert hand, 1t is Hala Mudra. When the two forefingers or the right as well as of the left hand, which are taken to the back side in the form of a rist, aro attaohod with tho front, portion of the left thumb, it is a Paga Mudra and is a bit spread and bent. 

In Amkusa Mudra, there is only one rist or tho : left hand and not of the right hand, 

26. When tho wise man (an aspirant) moves his forefinger of the right hand which is standing in the middle part on the loft hand faoing downward, it is Ghanta Mudra and is said to be dear (to no siva). 

27, 28, 89 and 30. When hands racing upward con ceal the fingers of each other, ring ringoraxe attached to the middle portion of the back side of the hands, foro fingers are taken to the joint or their routs, widalo fingers are united, the little fingers are hardened and aga in the fore-fingers stand separately on the niadlo part of the back side, it is Mud gara Vudra whioh 10 said to be ag Trisikha (Having three poaka) and 10 kings unification 

atonca. 

When the wise man, for calling a aioty with 

72. 

Handra 1.@. for Avahana Mudra, artor making tho Anjali." la cavity or hollow formed by folding and joining tho open hands together with two hands) takes tho thunb to tho roots of the ring fingers and the lists of two hands, tho thumbs of which are raised , 1t la sthapani (Lit. placing) Hudra. 

31. Samnirodhini (Lit. Confinement) is that Mudra in which both thumbs are placed in the Middle of the Palm. Dravyada (Lit. giver of the substanco), mudra is that in which thumb stands straight forward." 

52. When the hands are upright the fingers or which are stretohed out and are attached to the heart, it 18 'Namas Krti' (Lit. solutation) Mudra and 19 meant for the aot of salutation to the sacred hymns.. 

89, 34. When all the fingers or both the banda remain covered by one another, the little ringer of the right hand 18 attached to the front part of the ring ringer of the left hand, similarly forer ingers and the middle finger of the left hand are attached to the ring fingers. of the right hand, the thumbs stand on the root from which the-palm begins, it is called Amrta Prabha (Lit. Shining as Nectar) Mudra. 

DESAS 

35. When the foret inger and the thib or the right hand are raised a bit and stand on the forefinger and tho thumb of the left hand, it is Yoga Kudra (Lit. the Lludra of Yoga) and is used for the acts of Yoga. 

36. Thus the wise enchantor (lantri) shoula bina all the Mudras in his heart. The word that dexotes all these Mudra's 1s 'awn Fr 1w) when the name of the budra ana then the word 'Namah' 1.. 'aun fir im amuka mudrayai Naulah. 

73. 
