+++
title = "११"

+++

1. Arter this, I shall tell you the initiation, obtainablo with great dirriculties, giver or the enjoyment and liberation and convincing the Sadhaka of its fruita at 

anga. 

8. For this initiation, neither otrolu (Mandala) 

and pool (Iunda) nor Nyasa ato., already mentioned, 1# used. 

ryan to take a bath depends on the will or tho Sadhaka. 

••••••••••• 

8. 4. The Sadhaka with his face towards the cast or the Worth, being decorated with beautiful flowurs and olothes, on enter ing into the altar, well ears with the oxer sont of a cow and doents with the pasto of the Sandal wood, should think of the abining sakti from the tips of the 

feet to the forehead and his own body burat aation or tho sakti Olabamudra). 

5. Wolly a baorbed in the sakti, the Sadhaka should meditate on the Malini sekti whoảo lustr. 1s 11km embrosia, for the preparation of his body, trom head to 

106. 

teet (Anul oma). 

6. After this, tha Sadhaka should think over the tattvas (from earth tattva to Maya) which' degavo puriri cation and which are already said to exist in his own body. on purifying the sacrifiolal materials, he should make then Immortal with the Sakti. 

7. The man, well versed in the applioation of the Mantras, should unity the Malini Mantra, covered by the Para Mantra in the beginning and in the end, or only Para Mantra, with all the religious functions, o Darling. 

8. First of all, on worshipping Ganesa for removal 10 of the obstructions, the Sadhaka should worship the line of the teachers beginning from his own teacher, 1.8., his own teachers, the teacher of his own teachers and Parana Guru 1.2. Peramosti. 

9. Next to the Ganapati, he should worship the.. great number of the Mantras. He should also worehip tha lords of the Mantras below them. 

10. In the end, he should worship Vidya, 1.0., Apara Sakti and 11ke it the Parapara Sakti. Tho Sadhaka should get the Para Sakti and vidya, 1.., Apara and Para para entered in the middla. 

11. In the east, the south, the west and the north, there should be four petals of a lotus on which the Mahesi, Brahmani and Kounari preceded by Indrani should be written. 

18. 13. 14. On the top of the lotus tho Sadhaka should write the name of God, having a mysterious tomu, that i.e., Ksa'. It should have the Jiva () Danda. (R) and 'Sula! (au) with it. Then he should place the 

107. 

right ringer (ha, aooord ing to the Malini Nyasa. Below it, the left breast (L) navel (ks), the throat (v) lort shoulder (Y) tongue (I) and upper 11p (a) should ba placed. (This Mantra contains the following letters - ks, 9, R, O Gh, L. Ks, v. Y, I, A). The Mantra is said to be the lord of the circle of the female attendants on Siva (Sarvayogini Cakra Adhipa). 

15. The mere utterance of the Mantra above mentioned, brings great fruit or its fruit 19 the game as that of the pronunciation of the Para Sakti. In the same way as it is mentioned in the workship of the Sakti, the Sadhaka ought to worship the group of the Virastakas (mentioned in the first adhikara 19-20). 

16. The Sadhaka, on worshipping the Virastaka with various materials, guon as, paste or the sandal wood, scents and garlands of the flowers ato. should utter the name or the diety with the word 'Sri preceding 1t 0.8. 

Sri Aghoreya, Sri Parama Ghoraya" eto. 

17. The preceptor, on telling the pupil who has been fully examined many times, and congcorating him with the Rudra Sakti, should place him before God, 1.6. Slva. 

18. On seeing his arms, he should 111uniuate the with the Rudra Sakti and give flowers to his hands which are smeared with sandal wood. 

19. 20. on seeing the hands without support, ad should think that they are supported by the Sakti. On seeing his eyes with his own eyes which are consecrated by the sakti and thinking that Sakti is stand ing in his hand, ne should let the rlowers rall. Wherever in the Mandala the flowers fall, the God belonging to the Mandala should be considered his (Pupil's) family (Kula). 

108. 

. 

21. 22. After this, having opened the mouth, the preceptor should get the flower fallan by the pupil. Then he who 16 the knower or Yoga, on worshipping the oirolo in the forehead' and in the hands or the pupil, should buldo the student to take his hand to the forehand. This pro 003s is called "The method of the hands of Siva (sivahasta 

viani) which at onoo cony inoes the Sadhaka or its fruits. 

SA 

85. After this, the prvooptor should get the caru (saoririolal oblation) consisting or the dats-troa fruit given by the pupil, On cons id er ing his body supported by the Sakti, he should plads the Caru before the pupil. 

24. The knower of the Mantra, fully absorbed in the pupil, on drawing his right hand, with the applioation of the throw of the flower, should get the Caru accepted. 

26. 26. The Sadhaka should take the daru to the mouth in accordance with the tho Sivahastavidhi' (already mentioned). Following this method, the Mantri should c1ve the 'Danta Kasta', containing the length of sixtaan hands, to the pupil. O Dovi, with the movenants or these picoes of the stiok, he should examine the unitioation or the Sakti (Sakti Pata). 

27. The wise preceptor should note the unirioation of the 3akt 1 pats, 1.8., whether the Sadhaka is uiried with the slow Sakti, high or higher one. The former, following those conventional practicas according to the Siva Cult, is regarded as 'Samayi' (follower of the conventional practicas). 

88. Wholly absorbed in the mind or the pupil, the Yogi (Proeptor) when he desires to initiate the pupil, should systematically as already mentioned, worship Siva, the Kuloga.109. 

29. The wino preooptor, on worshipping the pupil, should look to his straight 'body, full or Sakti, from tho tips of the feet to the forehead. 

LOOOOOOOOOO 

30. He (Presoptor) should do the Nyaua, as already mentioned in accordance with the Malini and Matrka Sakti, of the pupil, in whom, the road deserving purifioation 1.6. Tattvad hva and pervasion of all the six roads 18 supposed. 

31, 32, 33, 84, 85. On sitting, the preceptor should follow the following method :- Keeping in view the idea of the pur ir loation of the Pupil, he should think that the Sakti shining like the burning fire, parvades everything 1.8., from the pupil (Vula Sodhya) to Siva. Ho should med itate on the everlasting Sakti burning all tha things or the universe and in the end ontering into the transcendental or immanental Siva. The Sakti appoint ad by the Yogis, brings up and makes rirm the substance belonging to its own class in the way and burns the number of the substances other than its own class. 

1. Respectfully, the wise preceptor a hould note tha following number of the marks in the pupil who is going to 

be purified by this Sakti. 

The first state which the Yogi 

getg is 'Ananda' (Ploasuro). The second 18 orcation (ua bhava) and the third and the fourth ara trabling and sleep. The firth state is ghurni (moving to and fro). 

OOO OOO OOO 

38. Thus unified with the Sakti in accordance with the slow, high and higher speed, the Sadhaka should out the share of the enjoyment and have a control over his limited self with his own accord.. 

37. When the pup 11 is uniried with tho Sakti, the Guru should order him for the enjoyment of the Yeaining things of the wiverso. Sometimes tho Sudhaka is not 

110. 

uniriod with the Sakti. 

38. 99. The teacher should burn the Sadbuka (who has not got Sakti Sapavasa) Externally and internally with Sakti at once. Thus the Badhaka toing burat by Sakti, ilke a trea the root or wbioh 15 eut, talla on the ground or begins to be delirious. The Quru should leav. kia aside who does not show even thi, sign, Qu one would throw away a stono. 

40. The Guru should do the initiation of the Sadhaka who is able and deservos to be initiated in the separate Tattvas, with the nathod of the practice of the prinoiples, which is going to be explained. 

41. The Sudhaka who is thus initiated and who desires to enjoy the remaining thing of the world, whould te ordersd to por form the scoricios bolonging to the tra otion of his family, which oonoists of the five status of waking and sloeping. 

42. Sprinkling of water on the body, with the wethod of Yoga (Yogabhisaka) of the Sudhaka, who decires to on joy, should be done by tha wise teacher after worshipping 118 body with the numerous waterials es already oited. 

43. We should worship Siva in a conok with the might namea (Kulastaka), such as, Aghora Paranaghora eto. after wakening him with the eight lamps the wiolus or whioh are soaked in.ghes. 

44. The teacher shall sprinkl. oa uim, according to the sivahasta Vidhi, the water or the conoh wiiob con tains all wels and wodio inal ylants aud wish is filled up with the parts of Sandal wood and water. 

48. This Abivoka (pinkling of watum) in malat 

111. 

to the initiation of the preocptor and awarda a right or a preoopt or to the Sadhaka, for the completion of this dikoa. The Sadhaka should prepare sixty six lampu like the sixty six lumps (Pinda). 

46. In the Abhisekavidhi, both the teacher and the taught are known to all the Yogis. Between the two, the teacher is better because he is the giver or the 11beration. 

47. Everyone or them should explain the threstola knowledge. The Yogi should give him his consent to perform his duties. 
