+++
title = "резрен"

+++
SEVENTEENTH ADHIKARA. 

m 

1. 2. Ir all this, mentioned above 18 not olear to a Yogin, and (suppose) if it is clear and the mind cannot be fixed on it, he should cheok the movement of the mind by the restraining breath (Pranayama) which is said to be or five kinds, that is, Puraka, Kumbhaka eto. . 

3. For the practice of the Pranayama, Yogins. should know the following five kinds, viz., Puraka (Lit. 

filling up), un bheka (stopping breath), Reohaka (mission 

of breath) apakarsaka (Red uotion of breath) and utkarsaka (Elevation of breath). 

4. The Puraka, as it fills the nostril with the wind, is said to be of two kinds and six kinde. Ono kind 1s sva bhava Puraka as it naturally r1113 the nostril with the wind and the other kind 18 virocya that emitg out the 

wind with which the nostril was already 1111ed. 

5. In accordance with the holes or the nosa, the mouth and the upper palate, this Puraka is divided into six kinds which again become many. 

6. 7. Kumbhaka is or rive kinds, that arter the Puraka, it is called Vidhrta (withhola); the other kind 1.8 after the reooka. Two kinds are in the end or the Kua bhaka and apakarsaka. The firth Icind is Sva bhavastha (Natural). It is also of many kinds in accordance with different pices. 

143. 

8. 9. 10. Rooaka, as it is already mentioned, divided into two kinds, should be of six kinds. Utkarse is that when some portion or the wind obstruotei in a pla is carried to another place: When again some portion or this wind (which has been carried to another place) is carried away, it is aparkarsaka. These two kinds are of many kinds. A yogin, sitting in the Padma posture should praotise these pranayamas. 

11. 12. The wind stopped in Kumbhaka for ten seconds that is four matras, ia lower. The wind stopped for twenty seconds, that is, for eight Matras, is midaling 

and brings Suomess. 

The game wind, ir it is stopped for 

thirty seconds, that is, for twolve matras, is the best or all. Nine flappings of two fingers (thumb and midnost fingar) which cover the knee for three times, make twolvo matras which oorrespond to the thirty seconds of the modern time limit. A Yorin should not praotiso the second dharan till he suoceeds in the first dharana in which the time 1 im it is found as four matras, in order to remove the daroots arising from the wind. 

13, 14. A Sadhaks should not restrain the wind in the eyes as it sustaing every limb of the body. V dharanas of the wind , neming Sikhi, ambu, Isa and Awita should be known respectively in accordance with the mani festation of it in the navel, the heart, tho palato and the throat. The thing on which a Yogin concentrates his mind, should be meditated upon as pervading all the dharanes. 

15. In 1sani dharana, a Sadhaka bhould woditate on the form oonsisting or vindu (sakti) and Nada (8iva). Ip Amrta dharena, ho should concentrato hig wind on the 

moon with the same method as it is said to ba in the Kela 

tyaca (averting death). 

144. 

18. A Yogin who praotises these dherenas in his Yog io tranoe, after leaving asido tha uvoidablo croup,, goes to the abode which is the boot or all. 

17. The number or the dharanas: is twolvo hundred and forty-three by placing the words, mentioned in tho verse, in the reverse order, viz., Indu (Moon) moans one (1) the dvi means two (2) Veda means four (4) and tri moans three (3) In this reverse order, the figuras are written below: 1243 

By these dharanas, a Sadhaka obtains tha bost fruit mentioned in the following: - 

18., Dharanas and Tarka (Lopio) are equally parts of Yoga, or them logio is the better as it oritioises the avoidablo group. Therefore orrorts in this dirsotion 

deserys appreciation. 

. 19. If the mind or a Sadhaka is stab111yed in the way which is avoid a ble with a view to enjoy it, no uhould ooatinue to check it till he obtains the plado 100 Tram 

diseases and worries. 

20. A dharana is that when the mind is fully devoted to the thing, it wants to get. It is paid to bo the best Jnana (knowledge) full or meditation. 

21. A Sadhaka, practising dharana for a moment, gets costasy (Samadhi). If it is a complished he obbaing the fruit he desires. 

22. Whatever object a Yogia sono entrato 110 wind 

on does not change. Ho is fully absorbed into 16 and afterwards he loses his personal cristonos and assues the 

form of the objeot he meditatos on. 

145. 

23. The Yogin who pleases the group of the femalo attendants on Siva and who appears as it is a dead body oannot be shaken from his costatio state even by the sharp objects such as sound, scent and foeling... 

84. A Yogin, having drawn his mind from the objeots ot the universe again and again in aocordance with the way (above mentioned), should do Pranayana for tho auodegs in Yoga. 

25. Or, a Yog in, thinking the entiro enjoyments of the universe as unnatural (Virupaka), on leaving his body, goes to the eternal place. 

26. He should do the Nyaga which has lusturo k like that or Kalanala already mentioned in the reveros order that is from feet to forehead two times (dviyugnata). 

27. He, having done the fiery Dharana which pains vital parts of the body, should fill his body, from tho thumb of his feet to the forehead, with the wind. 

28. He, who knows Yoga, on drawing orr the wind from the thumb, should carry it to tho aperturo or the crown or the head (Brahmarandhra) and then he should out all the vital parts of the body by the following mantra. 

29. The word (giva' means 'Sa', 'Aaidvija' means "Ka which is again acoompanied by "Nawhich denotes the head. Again two words "Ka" and "gao guoooed to tho words mentioned above. Thus the whole Mantra is ab unders 

Men 

ng Kn Kon 

30. O Dovi, it is Kala Ratri Mantra which outs oftal parts of body. A man who desires long liro should not pronounco it. 

146. 

31. There 18 headaone by the utterance or the Hantra Pirty times. On paying attention to this belier, the conqueror or death, should take care of it. 

32. Having pressed the wind which is the form of Vindu (Sakt 1) and Nada (siva) and having arawa it atonom, the Sadhaka should discharge the Kaleratri which is staying 

there. 

33. All this is explained to you accord ing to the 3 iddha Yogishvari tantra. Success in the form or Mantras can be had from it. 

34. The same wind is worshipped by the people in the forms or Mantras. O worshipped by the gods, this, the best knowable Jneya Sad bhava is explained to you. 

35. Even to Kartikeya who is not dovotee, this 

Mantra, should not be spoken by me. Having filled the bally with the wind till it reaches the aperturo or the crown of the head, it should be sent baok till it comes to the heart and yields the desire of Yogins. 

37. A Yogin should continue this praction for seven days till the wind pervadas the Navel. 

38. 39. From that day, a Yogin can draw oven gods by dint of k its practice. A Yogin can have tho best knowledge that has been practised by the other Yogins. There is no need of other low philosophies (Kuudra Sagana). First of all, there is a great Ghurni (a certain costadio movement) and then Kampe (trembling). After it, o deyi, a limited soul (Anu) seems as ir it is burning.147. 
