+++
title = "१९"

+++
NINTEENTH ADHIKARA. 

1. On hearing this best method of Yoga and balut in, the Guru of the world, Parvati, whose face is always pleasing, said. 

2. O' DovaI heard the bhinnayoni Malini as it is to be achieved. I also know the three Vidyas with their 

Anzag. 

3. Now I wish to know how to achieve the Abhinna yoni Malini. Please tell me about this for tho woll-bbing of the lords of Sadhekas. 

4. The Lord of the worlds (9iva); whose face is like a blooming lotus-flower, Aaked respectiully by Parvati, said what was like neotar. 

. 5. A wise Yoxin, who wishes to worship Siva by the method mentioned in the Kula', first of all, should worship Kulacakra' by the way mentioned in the initiation.. 

8. Then he should do the Japa or Paramantra continuously a hundred thousand times. The Japa should be in a samputa form. The speed of the Japa chould neithsr. be rapid nor slow. 

156. 

Sektis, continuously one lakh of each, should be done. He should attentively algo do the Japa of Siva (Kulesvara) aix lakh. 

8. A wise Sadhaka, who is attentive and regular, by the one tenth of 'Homa' consisting of the material already pregoribed for, of the Japa, attains success in hiy speeoh. 

9. Saktis (Kanyaga or Kanyaka Devi) bring various materials or enjoyment to him who performs Japa in his own 

Kula' (family) and who 18 not fit for the a irrioult labour (Sadhana). 

10. A man who is capable of doing Sadhana can brine all s1ddhis. He, following this method should wand er like a bird which 18 deluded (ud bhrantra). 

11. He, on staying in a city, town and village for five, three and one night, should perform this Vidhi. 

12. If the first letter or a thing or a city is found in the group of letters written in the Kulacakra, then it is said to be the Kula of the thing or the city by the people who are well verged in the art or a Kula. 

13. The deity that ooours in the group should be known as Devata of the name or a city and should be worshipp -ed primarily as a Lord. 

14. 15. 16. A Sadhaka, having entered into a bity respeotfully and having followed his own d ireotion, should prepare a circle (Kulaoakra) for his prosperity. He should stay in the oity, town or village for three months, that is, one month for each, and worship Mahesa as the diety when the sun rises.157. 

17. He should continue to stay there or follow his own a ir action till sonething supreme appears. Ir be has to leave that place, he should continue to remember his own Kula or the Kula of the place. 

18. He (Mantrin) should continue this procese till he comes to his own place, arter roaming according to the method mentioned in the Kulasakra vidhi. 

19. O Devesi, on wandering, when he conos badk in the presoribed time limit, the heroines of the place come 

there. 

20. He must offer an edible oblation or it should be got offered by some one else. By this method, he becomes firm-minded as well as firm charactered. 

21. Having got a meeting place of the Yoginia, he becomes sucoesgful within six months. This method cannot 

be followed by mean persons who are devoid of strength. 

ев 

22. 23. 24. This method is chiefly mentioned in all Kula Sastrag as 'Bringer of all Sidanis. If a Sadhaka ls unable to stay in a city, e town or a village, he should only stay in one place of the three and follow his om direction. By the praotice of the three years, he will have the best fruit. If he is unable to do this also, he, on relying upon a mouthful or bread, should meditate on the Kula Cakra in the wheel of the navel.. 

25. 26. 27. Keeping the same time-limit in view, he should mentally wender. By six months practice a great number of Yoginis which illuminate their knowledge, manifest themselves undoubtedly in his body. By the mani festation of this number, the Yogin beo omes a Kulin (perfect Salva) in the family of Yogins. O Paraineavari, 

158, 

he becomes lord of Yogins and he should noditate on the eloht letters from "Ye' to 'Ha'. 

28. 29. The Yogin should meditate on the group of the eight words, the form or which is shining and at the same time dreadful and in the middle part of which sell-1lluminatory Kul sana is standing. He, afterwards, with a view to get an abode of Yoginis, should meditats on the group (Cakra) which has assumed a form of the flame of a lamp. 

30. Realisation of this state is called (Pind - astha) the other name of which is mentioned as "buddha' (Lit. known). Then, o Devi, a special posture of the Yogin appears at once. 

31. The Yogin of this stato has sentiments or 

various kinds - erotio, heroio, pathetic, sorrowful and 

angry. 

O Parvati, worshipped by the Gods, It a pre 

buddha (particularly known) state in the Pinagtha state. 

32. The Yogin, who is busy in this praotlom for many days, gets the knowledge of the tattvas, such as, earth, water etc. 

33. 34. It is the best or the Pindaatha, is called 'Supra buddha' or the Yogin should meditate on the eight-petalled wheel with words from Ya® to Ha. accompanied by a dot, or, on twenty four petalled wheel with the words from 'Ka' to Bha ao companied by a dot. The Yogin who practises this Yoga, gets also the same fruits which are already mentioned. 

55. A Yogin should meditate on the sixteen petulled wheel full of sixteen vovely or full or oight 

Rudras, Aghora, Paranaghora eto, in the firth face of 

Siva. 

36. Seventy-two arteries existing in the wool of the navel are collected in a place, therefore, it is: called Pinda. 

87. Therefore, detailed knowledge of them and their parts, which exist there in the form of a not in to be acquired by a Yogin. Therefore this knowledge 

in detallis.tornady Rindasthartato 

A 

S 

DUE 

38. By one year's practice, a Yogin williagly becomes free from old age. Besides, a Yogin should get the knowledge of the rive wheels, whion exist in the heart in the same form in which they occur in the Brama Randhra. 

39. Wise people divide the Pada Stato into four kinds. The Padastha Stato is that when a Yogin o Devi, knows all objects of the world. 

40. The tur lya state (the fourth) should be known of fifteen kinds. The success in the Sarvatobhadra stato (the name of whion 16 Jagrat Ma. II 26), brings all-round good to the Yogin. 

41. The Yog in who has got the vision of the tattvas which are below the Maya, becomes free from old age, death and the stage of three Gunas, though tho por. vasion of the Sarvoto bhadra stato is very, 111nited. 

42. The Yogin, existing in Barvatobhadra stato knows the tattva below the Maya #tattva and becomed the Lord of the 

In the Padestha state, the Yogin should not med 1tate on the objeot which has the lustre or a moon or 

a lampa. (He has to neditate on tho objeat whioh has lustre or the sun). 

180. 

· 43. The meditation or the Yogin who fills his body with this heap of Neotar, destroys his death un doubtedly. 

44. 45. The meditation on the aiao or the moon and others 18 incidentally said to you (Parvati). In reality, in whatever form the Sakti (Parmesvari) 13 med itated on in kinds or Pind astha and others, sho yields desired fruits. People say that the sakti is an essential form or Siva who averts all 111 omens. 

46. 47. The rive-petuuled wheel, shining 11ko the sun, erists between the two eyebrows and its full knowledge is called 'Rupastha'. Its kaowledge also brings the same sid this wh loh are found in the Isvara stato. : 0 Davosi, the Rupatita state is already mentioned many times. 

48. 49. This pervasion of the Kula Cakra, in brier, 19. explained collectively and separately in the sense 'or dirrerent letters to generally get all siddhis and part oularly in the three Vidyas, for the sake of the Yogins who desire to adopt the Yogio method according to Siddhayogis vari tantra. 

50, 51, 52, 53. The difference of letters is now explained by keeping them in view as a conmunity (Sampradaya) A yogin should mod Itate on the Sakti in the form of a woman adorned by the white olothes, weated in the wheel of the Navel, having a lustre of crores or loons and a constant seed or all the Sastras, which (the seed) is coming out or the mouth of the Sadhaka, appearing like a creeper and a garland made of stars, full of the shining rays and whose lustre 19 limitless. By the practice of this form for fifteen days, a Yogin radiates (speaks out, reditos) a. great number or sastres constantly. . 

161. 

54. 55. A Yogin, by one month's and six months or one year', practice, can be able to know the Sastres whose tert and meanings are lost, in his Yogio trance in a dream and by his own accord respectively. In brier, It is only an inoidental fruit which is mentioned. : 

56. Besides, there are other siddhis, such as equality with the Vidyesvara. Now, according to tho. difference of letters (tho sana Salti) 18 explained.. 

57. The Yogins who are desirous to enjoy fruits ghould meditate on the Para Sakti in accordance with its descending order, that is, para parapara and apara. . 

58. 59. 60. The Yogin should meditate on the letter from Kula Sakti in its own place where it is found in the limbs of the Sakt is. He, stabilizing in mind, the darkness of which is removed by the shining lustre of the 3aktis on, it, accord ing to the method of tattvas and the time limit presoribed for it, obtains the fruit arising from the pervasion of the letters, or he can apply this method in hypnotiam. 

. 61. 62. 63. 64. Then it accomplises the desire of the Sadhaka at once. He should meditate on the Sakti appearing like the rising sun, possessing all letters in it, shining like gold and from which wine is oozing, for 

even days in the limbs of the person whom he wishes to bring under his own control. The nan whom he wishes to bring under him like a servant does not want any other master. By the praotics of three weeks, he can bring, not to speak of a human lady, even a fairy, urvasi whose feet and eyes are doluded and who is even living in a city full of wind and the fire. 

65. 66. This Sakti should be known as Pindalerati 

162 

Kari' (Lit. that which attraota a thing and draws 10 from a long distance) as it brings a thing from the distance or four hundred miles. The reditation and the application of this Sakti in its own place, which appears liko molten gold and the lustre of which is just like the full moon of the Purna Maşi night of the spring season, brings incomparable peace to the Yorin and others. 

67. 68. O Parvati, ten daya preot 1ce, brings great strength. For the sake of the destruction or some body, he should meditate on this Sakti appearing like the Juice or a gambu fruit and the spear of a thund er bolt. For the sake of delusion, he should ned itate on it in the form of the wings of a parrot. In order to doutroy the 1 1mbs of somebody, it should be meditated on in the form of a Bajranila jewel. 

89. 10. For the destruction or enemies, the Yogin should meditate on the Sakti, the touoh or whion 13 like Kalanala (Lit. death-riro). In ordor to destroy the very strong (adrisamopame, that is, like a mountain) croup or the fearless persone, the Balti covered by tho fire and appearing 11ke smoke should be meditated bn in the form of a stok appearing like a garland. For removal of anger, it should be meditated on in the form which is mentioned 

for bringing peece. 

71. A wise Sadhaka for giving arrliction to sono one tapana should meditate on it in the same process whiloh is mentioned for peace, but in this case, its torn should be like that or the sun. For malicious (Vidyosa and dog truotion) purpose, it should be meditated in the pigeon-like and the blue jay-11ko form respectively. 

! 

78. 78. In giving pain (utasada) to sono cnol 

165. 

1t should be meditated in the blue-green, yollow, red and white oolours. To orsato diseases in every limb),-10 should be meditated on in the one colour which is or the disease by the same process whion is mentioned for the destruotive work (Marana). For the removal of the disease, 1t six should be med Itated in the same method which 1a prosoribed 

74. for the removal of artificial ox matura) diseases, it should be meditated on in tho sano form wisien 18 mentioned for peace. If some ono destros audosos - 12 his speech, by its japa, he should follow the method mentioned below... 

75. 76. 77. A wise (Yogin) should make a garland of the beads or jewels, pearl, and conohes or or the boads or gold. The beads of the garland ahould be firty. The measuro of it should be like that of the aim of tho Sadhaka. Its form should be 11k@ that of the bangles. Ha, on touoh ing it with his breast and worshipping it and tho Lord or the Kula (Siva) by soents and the paste or the Sandal wood, ghould got Sakti entered there. 

78. The V 1jamantra should be uttered in the niaalo of the Para Mantra, that is, first Para, mantra should be uttered then the vija mantra and then again Para Mantra. In the first letter, 1.e., in all the lottors upto 

Ksa' should be fixed there. 

79. A Yogin ahould meditate on the first letter, that is, ha as pervader of all. In both kinds of letters, that 18 Matrka letters and Malini-letters, this method should be adopted. 

80. The second letters, 1.e., a" and "R1 adoord ing to the Matrka se school and "Malini haig respotively should also be pervader and should be placed like the first 

164. 

letter. This method should be applied to the third, fourth, eto. letters of the Matréka sohool and the letters of the Malini Sohool. 

81. On meditating on the sakti the lustro of which is like a thread, the Yogin should place it in the midst of the beads of the garland in order to make the thread of it successful. 

82. The Yogin whoula oiroulate the garland 11ke a wheel. Whatever he speaks in this prooegs should be considered as Jepa for success in the Mantras... 

83. 84. 85. A similar sacrifice (homa), as it is done for the thing whioh is to be burnt, should be perform ed in this initiation 

Ir a Yog in, being angry, circulates the garland in the reverse order, he will kill his enemy with his servants, army and conveyance. 

O Devi, for whatever work, tho Sadhaka who carved the Sakti on consecrating it at night, oiroulates the thread of the garland with a good intention, O.my darling, tho samo 18 achieved. 

16. 87. Moving of the garland for six monthe '18 said to be the servioe of it. A yogin, being in this - service for three years, achieves Quocess in his speech, which is available only with great airfioulty. There is no other success which is better than this Váks ladní in the world o Dati. 

88. 89, 90, 91, 92, 93. All speeches consist of letters, which are the form of Valini. Thus this Malini should be meditated on in its letter form or a 

166. 

Sadhaka should med itato on it, coming out of one's own body in the form of flames and then spreading and entering by its own numerous constant flames and rays into a village, a town, a city, a country, the whole range of the earth all over the universe and the large broup of peoplo separately. on pervading them internally and externally and then again entering into his owa body in the same foru. He, being fully absorbed in it, should practise this pro oegs daily. After a month all the residents of the place, attraoted by his 3akti and splondour come to him as to a pilgrimage. 

94. Undoubtedly within six months, the other beautiful dansels of various forms, who reside on tho early are agitatod. 

05. O Mahadevi, by one yearpractice all sorts of nayikas (heroinos) born from the womb, waters, fields and religious places are gradually agitated. I 

08. By three years practice, divine ladies resid ing in the sky, Brabmaloka and in the midst or the whole universe become agitated. 

97. 98. They all giro their (oooult) knowledge which is desired and requested by the Sadhaka. If they do not give their knowlodge the a ivine knowledge, already obtained by him and the line of his family, comes to an end. 

99. 100. 101. The Sadhakas, who have obayed the order of their Guru, get incomparablo success. A Yosin, having attained knowledge from them is a real Yogin in the family of Yogins. · He, having enjoyed the desired fruita, goes to an eternal aboda in the end. For the sale or Yoging, who follow the Kula method, this Kaulika methods 1. explained in brier. 

166. 