+++
title = "реирез"

+++
TWENTY-FIRST ADHIKARA 

1. Now, the most secret knowledge of Siva, which is am brosia the beat, is described for the destruotion or 

diseases and death or the Yagins. 

. 

2. In the wheel consisting of sixtoen apokos which appears flying to the sky (Khage) and sound which the aise 

178. 

(Yarnika) is made by the moon, the Yogin should noditate on the Para Sakti with its form from which neotar is oozing. 

3. The wiso Sadhaka boins prepared by the Anganyasa aforesaid, having taken his tongue to the sort palato, should fix it there. 

4. 5. He should concentrate his mind on tho white d 180 of the moon, from which noctar oozing. Por a moment his mouth is filled with saling water, which is accompanied by the scent or iron. He should not drink it but throw it orr. He should continue this practico till the salino water turns into a dol1olous taste. 

6. After six months, the Sadhaka, drinking that dello ious water, is free from old age and diseases. Ho oonquers doath easily after ono year. 

7. From the day when the Saline tasto changes into a delicious one, the mouth of the Yogin is f111ed with whatever he thinks. 

8. The Yogin a mouth 19 filled with whatever, blood, wine, fats, milk, ghee or oil, ho thinica attontivoly. 

9. I. (Siva) shall explain the other excellent method of passing from one body to another. This passing 

(Samkranti) is a Yogavidya by which a man can ontor into the dead body of another person. 

10. The Yogin, staying in a place, freo trom wind, and having control over his breath and the method or postures should enter gradually to the cotton of colatropios Qigentia (Arka Plant) by means of the wind. 

11. 12. He should apply the Svada Krsti 'method to trezole and Nimba troe, He should make an image of Sandal 

174. 

wood. treacle and camphor. full or qualities and freo Prom 

them. He, plao ing his own limbs on the limbs or the age, after doing an Anganyasa, should penetrate into it gradually. 

13. First of all, that imago should be shut up and then its main limbs should be shaken. 

14. The image runs and comes to the presence of the Yogin who praot 18es this method and who is devoted to Yoga. 

15. He should continue to guide it again and again till it comes to its own place. He should make it walk waon it falls and lies on its baok with the face upwards near the Yogin. 

16. He should do this praotice whole-heartedly till it comes to his control. From the time when it comes under his control, the Yogin can enter into whatever he 11kes. 

17. 18. The wise Sadhake, passing from his own body to that of a dead man, having throwd the group of energies into the joints or the dead body like water, should fill (Akramet) every limb of the body with the energy. He should preserve his body or leave it orr in this method. 

19. The Yogin, who has got perfection over his a in, leaving his body, can have numberless bodies at a time undoubtedly. 

20. 21. 22. 23. 24. I (siva) shall explain another 

divine (Sadhana) which convinces a Sadhaka or its fruit at once, the name of which is Samad hanamrte. (Lit. placing of nestar) and whioh destroys the death or Yogins. The other name of it Candrakruti (Lit. drawing of the moon) which 

175. 

brings salvation and enjoyment within a month. The vise Sadhaka, who is olean and is fasting, who has bathed and worshipped (siva) should place the net of Kalas (Radlaricos) full or Para Sakti in the moon on the second day of the bright fortnight in the month or Balsakhg. The wiso : Sadhaka, staying in a place, which is without a support, who is attentively and peacefully identical with Siva, should see the moon till she sets. Fully absorbed in the meditation of the moon, the Sadhaka should eat his food oons ist ing of milk. 

25. A Yogin should do this practice daily till the full moon day comes. He should sleep all the night with the Meditation on the Para Sakti in the also of the 

mo on. 

26. 27. 28. 29. At midnight or the full moon day, 

the Yogin, when there 18 no noise and everybody is asleep, sees undoubtedly the para Devi, appearing like the innumer - able rays of the moon, decorated with the garland, made of the stars, bearing white olothes, wma besreared with the white paste of the Sandal wood, full of tho ornamento, 'mado of pearls, beautiful full of the new youth, pleasing from all sides or which neotar 18 flowing, seated on the seat or a lotus flower, slumber ing under the Yogic posture and atay ing in the disc of the moon. 

30. The Yogin, who has good intellect, after pervading it with his mind, should continue to draw it till it comes to the front part of his mouth. Then he should stabilize his mind on it. 

31. Then, having spread his mouth with the mind attached to its meditation and having drawn it, the Yog in should swallow it up and meditate on it in his heart again. 

178. 

32. The Yogin 18 free from the troubles by a int of the entrance of the Para, and having sot tho strength like that of the Sakti, lives here till the stars and moon are on the globe. 

33. The single yogin, having divided his limited self into many souls at his own will, can enjoy the worlds which are under his own control at a time 

34. 35. If he cannot meditate on the Para in the moon, on the sky, he should meditate on the reflection or the moon in water eto. as it is aforesaid. 

36. Having drunk the reflection with his sind, inertitating on the Para, he should sleep all the night.. Thus he will get regular fruit within six months. 

TY 
