+++
title = "२३"

+++
TWENTY THIRD ADHIKARA. 

1. After this, I. (Siva) shall explain to you the most secret Yoga, which brings fruits to the yogins in order to ahow their suodass in it. 

2. The Yogin, artor doing the Nyesa, already 

180. 

mentioned, should place his mind in his ear 10' a place, which has no wind or 11ttie wind and whlob is free from outex noises 

3. The Yogin thon hoard a olear sound like that or a purified bell-metal boaten again and again. 

4. 5. Having heard the same sound O Mahadevi, the Sadhaka is freed from all deeds, good and bad. The Yogin, after concentrating his mind there for six months. k 

sounds of birds olearly and without affort. After one year, he has the knowledge or hearing from a distance. 

8. There is no wond er 11 he attains all depirog within three years. All this is an accomplishment without any difriculty. 

7. 8. After doing the nyasa aforesaia, a Sadhala, with his baok towards the sun and supported by a stand, should see his shadow umobstruoted and come out or the wick of smoke above his forehead with mind fully absorbed into 

it, in the month of Pohá. 

9. As soon as a Yogin becomes fully abuorbed in it, he attains great fruit (vitti). 

10. Then he sees a great splendour which appears like the rays or the sun and the sight of which destroya all sing. 

11. When the Yogin praotises this light for cho: month, the light spreads everywhere and he see all thou directions full of the lines of the flames. 

12. A Yogin, doing the practice or the Yoga for six months, obtains all knoworship. By one years practice, he has the divine body and onjoys the earth 11kq Siva. 

181. 

. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. (Now) olasses or corta in mantras, which hold an eternal and first placo aro ciplain ed. The first group or the five letters, viz., Heim, Kslam, Key im, Van, Ks em 18 called the first Pancala". The other group or the rive lottora 1.e. Ham, Yan, Rem, Lam Vam, 18 called the second Panoaka. On either side or the Karnika, the two group of sight letters, that is, Rim, Rim, Irim, Lrim, Om aum, Han, Am (ahould be placed). 

In the petals, letters from *Kao to Bha' and five letters - Ham, Ham, Him. Him, Hum, on the sides of the potals, the Saktis with their proper names should be placed on the Mandala, prepared by the threo Saktig (Para, Parapara, Apara) the very subtle form or Preta (siva) should be placed. The peaks of the Sula, the word 'gra should be placed, in addition to the above mentioned olasses, the following classes or Mantra, Namah, Svaha, Vesat, flum, Vausat and *Phat should be used in the Yoxas, the formation or which is now mentioned. 

18. 19. The abhinnayoni Malini should be meditated on in all the expiatory rites. A Sadhake is allowed to med itate on even on the Bhinna Yoại Malini, which is ox sessively strong. He is also allowed to cono entrato on the A bhinna Yoni Malini, which is woak-bodied. O dear Parvati, ir once the jepa of the Malini is begun by a Sadhaka, having control over his mental movements, it should be three or even more than this. 

20, I (siva) shall explain its application, which 3ives pleasure and success to those who are in the habit or wand er ing in the fields and the placos outside. 

81. The Words "Nasa Mahaprana, Dandas and Ouhya represent four letters I E, I Ha tha and Sa®, Whion should be accompanied by a dot. The mantra is called "Dvyakara 

182. 

Vidya' the form of whion is 

Im, Ham, Khem, Sar. 

22. A Sadhaka or pleasing intelleot, who has 

served the above mentioned 'Dvyakura Mantra with tho! presoribed method, should wander in the places and tho fields for the sake or suocess. O Parvati, saluted by the brave persons, there is no use of wandering withouts the Mantra. 

23, 24, 25, 26, 27. On reaching the placo (whero he desires to meditate on the Mantra), the Sadhaka should cover his self and the place by the Dyaksara Vidya wirioh appears 11ke a red thread. He should be attentive to his purpose outwardly and inwardly. The Yoginis of dreadful strength come to the place and kive their own particulars. By the more possession of the particulars, o noble Parvati, he becomes equal to thoru (Yoginis) and enjoys various : luxuries to his heart's content. Or he should utter tho 

Dvyaksara Mantra' one lakh times, and should do its tarpana one tenth. This Sadhana can be applied for ordinary works. A mere utterance of the Dyyaksara Vidya destroys poison. 

28. This Dvyaksara Vidya moves 11ke a wheel. A Sadhaka should meditate on this Vidya of real colour whion is full of the aotivities or inlet and outlet and which is free from its ordinary forms, such as Vinda and Nada in the middle or the Yoni. 

29. Practice of this Yoga with an attentive mind, makes a Sadhaka strong (His sexual energies increase) and he is able to agitato evea urvasi by the amorous playa such As Sanghata, Vighata and 'Alunoana'. 

30. The Dvyaksara vidya pleased by the lotus flower and shriphala brings wealth to the Sadhaka who has served it by three lakh of Japa. 

18%. 

31. The Duyakaara Devi seated on the sixfold goat, 

acoomplished by the method above mentioned, brings all sorts 

of 31ddhis to those who aro utterers of the lantra: 

32. A wise Sadhaka should offer a sixfold seat to all the Cakras without the Sula Padma Vidhi, Navatmaka and Saptaka Mantra. 

33. With the applioation of the Fray?Ja (Sauh) the great Mudra (Theoari) should be used for this purpose. 

I (siva) shall oxplain 

another Svapza Jnana 

Prayoga'. 

34. 35. O Devi, 17 a Sedhaka is identical with the wheel of heart attentively at night for one month, whatever he sees in his dream comes true. He should be regular in the matter of time limit. 

36, 37, 38. Whatever (good or bad) a Sadhaka koos in his dream in the first, second, third and the fourth (Arunodaya Vela) Parts of the night will be true reapaotive ly by the practice of one year, six months, threo months and ten days. By this Yoga, he is able to forstell wiethor ho himself or other will succeed in such and such a work or not. This Supta Jnana Yoga should be applied when the need or it arises. O Deri, Philosophy of Siddhayog isvari Tentre is explained. 

39. 40. There is no philosophy better than that of the 3 iddha Yogishyari tantra in the world, from carts to Siva. One, who knows it really, 19 undoubtedly Siva. To place the dust of his feet on the head, destroys sins. hearing this, Mahadevi (Parvati) was highly content ad. 

41. 42. Thus she saluted Him again and again and asked him for pardon. This is Malini Vijayottura Tentra, 

184. 

which I (Kartikeya) told you (Santlunara eto.). The Devl has told me this best Yoga. You should also not toll thiy great one to those who are not your disciples. . 

43. This Yoga should not be explained to the disciples of others without examining them. It should be given only to those who are busy in the Yogio practices, humble, obedient and who are entirely devoted to Siva., 

The sages having learned this Jnana Yaga from Kertikeya and having practised it, have accomplished great 

guccess. 

VII. NOTES ON THE TEXK. 

FIRST ADHIKARA. 

LLLLL 

NOTES. 

Verse 1: The term Jnana Candra in the text means oit or Cit Sakti for whioh no english tsin is oqui. 

valent. The word is translated by consciousness overy 

where. 

The word "Mukha means the Sakti or giva (cf. Saivi mukhamehooyate, V.Bhai). 

The Jagadananda® in the text befers to the ultimate Reality, T.A. 1st. A. Oom. 1st, verse. Besides, It also refers to the one and last of the six stages or pleasure, viz., N1Jananda, Parananda, Brahmand, Mahananda, oidananda, and Jacadananda. The stage is totally free from all dirrerentiations and it represents the state of 

Parahanta. 

The conception "Cit" or "Olt Saktin in Indian Philosophy is unique. The Western thinkers havo rodunod the phenomenal appearance into W111, Idea, Intention or Imagination. But it is Indian Philosophy whioh has reduo ad the whole creation into the concept or "010" (congoiousness) which pervadeg all the universo in the form or consciousness sub-consciousness and unconso iousness. Thus the visible world in its root as well as in ito manifestation 19 1 consoiousnesa. This idea is referred to by the worát "Marioayah" (Rays) in the text, whloh belons to Siva, who 18 said to be "the moon of knowledgo" (Jnana Candra). As 

the rays of the moon are not dirferent from hor. aimilarly 

186. 

Sakti or power of Siva is not different from the powerholder (Sakt iman). Thus Sive the male principle, in its quiesoont state is whole and absolute, but in its manifested State, it becomes Sakti, which is part and parool of its nature. The whole, though Sakti as a part is separated from it, st111 rema ing whole or full (Purna). Its fullness nover ceases. The one becomes many in its active state but at the aene time it holds its oneness and porreotion. The como idea 19 explained in Saktayosya Jagatsarvam". 

Verse 3. Siva Sakti ummukhi Karana - to bo Inspired by Sakti holds an important place in the Trika Philosophy of Kashmir. The other Philosophical scholars of India also stress on this inspiration and call it "Divine krace which is not dirrerent from the Sanskrit words"Anugraha" and "Anukampa". For the spiritual reall-, sation, divino grace is highly essential. Saiva and Salta philosophers of India call it "Sakt 1° which assumes many forms and produces diversirication of the unity or Lord Siya. It is this Sakti that lies united with siya in Hig repose in its latent form and is inactive. In its potont. form, it acts and manifests the whole universo. Tho Salti as a power or energy is everywhere. This Sakti ohining in us 18 intuition that it inspires man to understand the highest goal and makes him realise the truth of truthz. This intuition 18 different from reason which belongs to the World of senses. It has no hold over superhuman objects. When reason is ulumined by Sakti or by the 1 grace of God, it becomes intuition and is denoted by many terms such as Saksatkara, dardana and Anubhava oto. Tho Upanisads call it "Agrya Buddhi" in tho vorso "Drsyato Tvagrya Buddhya Suksmaya Sukomaadarsibh ih" (The universal selt is perceived through their penetrating and subtle in telleot by the men or subtle perception). Srimad Bhagavat187. 

Gita names it Euddhiyoga in the tenth verge of tho Book x "Dadar 1 buddhiyogam tam Yena Uam upayanti te". (I 81vo may devotees tha Yoca of wisdom through which they coke to me). 

This divine inspiration, in its highest form, is regarded as "Rudra Sakti S amavesa" (Uniricntion with the Sakti of Rudra or Siva) or simply ngakt ipata" (For the detailed information T.A. 13th A and Ma Vijayottara Tantra ist. adhi. 42, 43 and 44). 

Verse 7. Sa ivism and Saktian equally lay stress on the doctrine or enjoyment-Salvation (Bhuktl-Muktivada). The manifested universe, which is produced by Maya according to the philosophy of Vedanta, 19 trensitory and ephemeral. The Salves and Saktas do not deny it. It is the manires tation of the Sakti, whioh belong to Sive and therefore, it 13 real. As waves of water, flames or the firé and rays of the sun are not different from water, fire and tho gun respectively, similarly the diversified universo la not dirferent from the Bhairava". V.Bhai, 110. All the objects of the senses and enjoyments of the world, we seo, are enlightened by Siva. He is everywhere, hence his product is also real and enjoyable. The liberation, accord ing to Saiva philosopher, is not other than the expansion of consciousness (cit Sakti) of Siva. The enjoyment or vordly things does not stand in the way of spiritual zoalization. Therefore, the Saiva Philosophy treats enjoyment and 11 bera tion alike. 

The enjoyer (Bhoktr) has changed himsolr into the form of the enjoyable things (Bhogya). Thus tho enjoyment of the sensuous things oannot produce any obstruotion in tho way of the mataphysical reality as the enjoyer and the en joyable are one and the same. (T.A, 9th. A., Co. pago 

172). 

188. 

Thero 18 nothing inpure in this world which is the finit isation of the infinite. The world is real and enjoy. able. (T.A., 4th. A., pace 268). 

Verge 13 and 14. The term 'Aghora from whioh Siva learns the contents or Siddhayogiavari Tantra means Supreme Reality free from space and time. It is the state or transcendency and represents as united whole or 31va and Sakti (s iva-3 akti-Samarasya). It also implies the Supreme State of Sabda (sound) or und istinguished form. As a matt of fact, the Sabda, in its unman ifested form, la consoious 

ness. 

The Mr. T. 1st. Ve.lst. P.22, has explained Aghora in the sense of Mahesvara (Niskala or transoendent Siva) wio 18 said to be oongo iousness (ava boahe Rupa) and from whom all words (Sabias) evolve. 

From the Tantrika point of view, this state of subtle Sabda 13 oalled "Para Val" "The Vaiyakaranas roga 

it as Sphota or subtle unit of Sabda, from which all arti. culate sounds prooaed. Ordinarily we can call it Sabda Brahman. In all respects, its infinitude cannot be questioned. 

Verse 15. The meanings of the word "Anu" in ti • text are not clear as it is included in the group or acce: C a ble principles. Undoubtedly everywhere, anu implies ro lation with Mala (impurity) which belongs to the other group (avoidabla), viz., Sakala and pralayakala. Therer it should be noted that the term "Any" likely ütands for the vijnakala due to ita inclusion in the acceptable tatt Besides, the Vijnakala pranata 18 superior to Sakala and pralaya kala prametrs which are bound by two and three ta respectively, while the former has only ono Nala (anavame 

189. 

Verse 16. In the verse, three impurities Anava, Tarms and Mayiya Mala, which veil the real nature of give, are mentioned. The Anava Mala is most important or all the 

three because the whole process or creation depends on it. 

The nature of the Anava mala its regarded as obsduration of the essential characteristics of Siva, which are consciousness and freedom. Veiling of the nature of 3iva , is caused by his own will, T.Sa. mentions that the Aneva mala is not different from the will of Siva, which oonoeals his chief feature, (or. Soyan Malah Paramoavarasya 3vatna Pracohadanecohato Nanyat Yincidasti, T.Sa. Sth. A.). 

The mala is or two kinds. The first kind is that when the conscious nature of Siva 1080g its freedom (Sva tantrya). The Vijnakala pramata represents this kind because it is conso iousness devoid from freedom (ci. Vina nain Bod hatmakam Rupam Kovalam (Svatantrya Rahitamasya asti iti vijnanakovali (T.A. 9th. A Comm 02). 

The second kind of the Mala is that wisen froedom free from consciousness remains. 

Ir the rirst kind Jnana predominates but it has no freedom. In the second kind, there is freedom but consciousness d 18 appears. 

The second Mala is Karma (related to Karma) Mala | which appears in the form of the enjoyment of the bad deeds. 

This Mala is mainly said to be the cause of the world and degrades Anus till the next dissolution takes placo. 

The third Mala is Maya Mala, which appears as body 

and the world. The illuţion of the wordly things deludes the anus and they get themselves attached to the showy world 

or innumerable oontur 168. T.A. 1st A. Com. 24. 

um 

190. 

The dontrine of the three impurities is specially connected with the seven Prametrs, Sekala, Pralayakala, Tijnanakala, Mantra, Martresvara, Mantramahesvara, and Siva. To understand the proper function of the Malas in the gradual ascent of a spiritual seeker, a brief desori ption of the seven Pranatrs (experiencers) in ascending order is necessary. 

Sakal Pranata (The worst form of the individual self) possesses all the three Malas already oited and thinka 

that the objects of this universe are the only aim of life. 

He is at a loss to distinguish between the subjeative and the objective aim of the life. The subjective stage is far from his approach. He m1gunderstands his objeоtive life as eubjective one. He 19 fully involved in the tattvas pron the earth to the Fale tattva. This Pramata wanders in the tattvas and thinks them as a subjective Reality oving to the taints which hav entangled him into the tattvas, Siva, the highest measurer, in the form of a lower Pramata, that 

19 Sakala Premata, forgets His real state and remains in 

volved in the Mundane objeots for centuries. 

The Pranata 

cannot rige high unless the wonderful Sakti-Pata takes place 

and elevates him. 

In short, the Sakala Pranata repres onts the materialistic state and regards the nonself as self (Anat 

meni Atina bhava). 

Prajayakala Pramata has two Malas, Karma and Maya mala and represents a bit higher state than that or the Sakala. The Pramata is totally free from all the tattvas except Maya wherein it remains involved until the new oreation takes place. The transformation or the Prematr into the status of the vijnanakala is not possible unless the Karma mala, the duration of which is upto båya tattva, 

191. 

is removed. 

3. 11e 11126-artie ?: :& ad fom Yana and Maya Kale and has only one mala, anava. As regards its association with the various tattvas, it is free from all the impure principles. The status assigned to this state 1s intermediary because its territory is beyond the Maya-- tattava and below the Su. Vidye state (cr. Mayorihvam Suddhavidyadhah. T.A. 9th A). 

The vijnanakala Stage 1. just like a midaling stair-093e, from which the spiritual journey la said to be easily acoessible. The Pranata knows the conscious natura of Siva temporarily. The cause of this waving state is anave due to which, the Pranata cannot attain perfection in its self-realisation. 

The Vignanakala Pranata is auperior to those already mentioned, in two respeots. Firstly it has only one mala and secondly this Mala is also d'esirous to be destroyed (Didhvans iau). 

4. Mantra Pranata is a higher stage. It is free from all taints except the Anava Mala which is also boing destroyed (Dhvamgamana). In Vignanakala Pranata, Anava Mala is desirous of being destroyed but here it is under the power of being actually destroyed.. 

The two qualities or aspects, 1.0, Prakasa, (Manifesting aspects) and Vimaraa (the manifestod aspadt) are balanoed in this Pramata and this is the stato or Puro Path, i.e. Suddha Vidya in which Io (Aham) and Thig. (Idam are equally balanced. In other words, the aubicotive and the objeot ivo tendency of the Premata are squal. The state is technically called Samadhrtatulaputa Nyaya wiloh moans balance or the pans of the soalo. Tho exterior vyuthana 

192. 

and intorior (Samadhi) tendenoy of the measurer is in a perfectly balanced state. The inrinite state is still out of his approach. The Pranata somat imea reols porturbed owing to the Vyutthana and at other he is quito calm on account of the Samadhi state. His wavering state has not disappeared totally as the two States (Vikalpa and Samadhi) have their separability and aotivity. 

5. The Mantresvara Pranata is a higher state than that of the Mantra state. The Anava Mala is destroyed (Dhvasta). The objeotive tendency of the Premata is more active than the subjective one. The stress lles on "This (Idam) and not on 'I' (Ahem). The state corresponds to Isvara tattva which the diversity dominates for the timo being. The idea or "This or That" (Idam Bhava) has not yet totally disappeared. This universal conoclouenoss 18 more bent towards the objective worla then to the subjective ons. The Premata obtains the capaoity of doing good and harm (Sapanugrahakaryegu Saltata) (T.A. 13th A.. 185), but the state or Siva Pramata is at 111 d 13tant. 

6. Mantramahesvara is the last but one, 1.0., 

Siva. 

In this stage the least differentiation of tho 

univerge or in other wordg the idea of the separation or the world from himself which was more active in the Mantre svara state, a bit fades away. Though tho 1dea of 1-1038 (Anambhava) prevails more rapidly and actively, tho idea of *This' (Idam Bhava) has not yet died out absolutely. There is emphasis on the 'I' out or the two terms I" (Aham) and "This" (Idam). Oneness of Siva is yet to be realised. 

7. Siva Pramata is the last and final state, which has been said to be the ultimato Reality in this philosophy. All sorts of differences, es neqsurable (Pransya) and 

measurer (Pranata) disappear. 

The stato of tho Pramaya 

15-12 

193. 

(Prema ya Bhumika) 18 absolutely involved in the state of the measurer (Pramatr Bhumika). Both of them becomo ono.' It 19 g non-dual gtate (Abhedavastha). The Pramata reallaos his real nature, that is, the universal consciousness. The free will (Santantrya Sakti) or Lord Siva, which has con tracted fis qualities and reduced Him into Manifoldness (Anekata) expands and brings Ħim into oneness. The aspi rant cannot feel this state or Sivahood in the physical frame of his body. So he has to part with his physical being, before he attained the supreme realization. 

The following table shows whers Pramata stands in respect of the tattvas and the malas: - 

THE TABLE OF SEVEN PRAMATRS. 

The name of Pranata. 

The name of the The name of the The position of 'Tattva in which. Mala which the 

Mala. the Pramata 1a . Pranata has. 

involved. 

bölgl A -Pramata 

Active State. 

From Kala to 1. Anava Mala. earth in reverse 2. Karma Mala. order, i.e., 3. Maya Mala. 

Great elements 5 

Tanmatras. 

6 

Aotion senses 5 

Knowledge 

Antahkarana 

Prakrti 

Puruga 

Sixtold sheath 

Pralayakala ' 

Maya Tattva 

Active. 

: 1. Anava Mala 

2. Karama Mala 

194. 

manakala 

Maha Maya 

1. Anava Mala 

(The Didhvang isu) State. The Prama ta dos frag'to be destroyed. 

Suddha Vidya 

1. Anva Mala 

ra 

Dhvandamana (go 

ing to be destroy mea). 

utresvara 

Isvara Tattva 

1. Anava lala. 

Dhvasta 

(Destroyed). 

antram ehes 

1. Anava Mala 

Dhvastatara 

Sada Siva Tattva. 

Ага. 

(Destroyed a bit more). 

31va Tattva 

1. No Mala 

Dhvastatama 

(totally destroyed). 

Vərse 18. The two terms "Sakalao end Niskala mentioned in the verse mean Vigvamaya (imanental) and visva ttirna (transcendent) nature of siva. Vigvamaya state of Siva implies his free will while the Visvottirna refers to 

his consciousness. 

His Sakti, in its unmanifestad form, 

has also the same attributes, 

Verse 19. In the verse the process or creation is mentioned. The transcendent Siva, by his free will, creates eight Vidyesvaras aghora, parama hora etc. In the place or this group, Mr.1.1.4 mentions Ananta, Sukama, Sivottama, Ekanatra, Eka rudra eto, T.A. 8th A algo follows this order. 

As a matter of fact, this group or oight lords are said to be creators of the impuro road (Asuddhavadhvan) wh 110 Siva is a ruler of the puro path (ci. Sudalva Dhvani 

195. 

Siyah Karta Prokto nanto Sito Prabhuh T.A. ath.). The group of the eight Mantramahesvarao 13 eocompanied by tho nine Saktis Vama eto. and the Seven Karores or the lantras. 

This first creation or Sive, though has the characteristios, consciousness (Jnana) and Salti (freedom) which are found in Siva himaalf, but it oarnot dosorve to have the status of its Lord due to the ignoranca (Agu Vidya) which is also found in it. 

As regards the naturo or thesa Vidyesvaras, Mr. T. olearly mentions that they are a bit below tho position or Paramesvara and are said to be servants (Niyojya) of Siva 

(cf. adhikara Mala Vasegat Kinoit Ana vaptaparangavaraganya it yasyaite preryah Mr. I 4, 4, Conx). 

As Mantra-mahesvaras are servants or Sive, s41 larly mantras are also serventa (Niyoye) of apara Mantros 

varas which are under the Parawantrosvarag. 

We should note that this state of a xulcr and tho 

ruled (Preraka prerya bheva) continues in the process of 

creation. 

Verge 21. The number of seven drors mantrag la divided into two parts. The first half of the mantras is sent to universe to be used by Sadhakes for their doll realisation. 

The remaining hall is reserved by Siva to be utilized by his own will at any time. 

Verge 22. The mention of two Prematus, that is, vijnanakala and Pralayakala, points out that tho Sakald Pramatr has no place in the spiritual roalisation according to the Saiva faith. The position of tho Vignanakala 19 

superior to that of Pralayakala bocause the foror has only 

1 96. 

one Mala oalled Anava and the latter contains two. 

Verse 26, 27. The process of creation, according to Ma, is mentioned here. As it is already gtatod that: Paramesa, first of all, creates Ananta, Sivottama oto.. eight lords. They, through Maya create Yala tron which three classes of Tattvas proceed. In the following chart the process of the categorical development is given: 

Siva 

Ananta 

Kala 

Vidya 

Avyakta 

Anu 01 Purusa. 

Raga 

Agtaguna Buddhi 

Niyati 

Ahankara 

Tala 

Mesas 

Buddhindriya 

Karmendriya 

Pandailaha bhuta. 

Verse 37. The form or the Yantra-ahosvaras is. desoribed just like the thumb (Angusthomatra) which relora to the Kala (Sakti). 

Mr. T. mentions the number or the Mantranahesvara one hundred and eighteen and their body is mado of Mala (Cr. Kaladyarabdha Dohanami Karotyastadasadhikan, lir. T. I 4, 9). It is the aparamantrosvara olays that has abt the197. 

body mado or Kala. 

Verse 42, 43. The author has referred to the doctrine of Sakti-pate or divino race in the verses. T.A. has mentioned nine kinda or Sakt 1-Pate but here only threo 

are stated, 

The first kind of Sakti-Pata" tiyra tivra" cannot 

be experienoed by a physical being. Ag soon as this Sakti comes, the Sadhaka breathes his last and is identified with Siva. In the end kind nadhyat ivra, the Sadhaka enjoys tho world ::: efter is, he deces cae viet te surans Reality. Accordin, to the third kind, called Vand ativa, the Sadhaka 

13 inspired to obtain this Yoza and consequently is taken to a good preceptor to have a spiritual inspiration from him. 

In the Saiva Tantras, the divine crac. is ompha. tically declared as a meens to spiritualisa Sadhakas. Direct or indireot intervention of Sakti is entirely need ful to a geeker of truth. Diksa, a religious rito, hola as "Significant by the Saiva system is a Pundamental l'actor that helps to create Sakti in the body of Sadhakas. The success or a Sadhake in his spiritual plano is absolutely dependent on the quantity and the quality of tho Salti. Pata that appears directly or indirectly (T.A, 150. A). 

Verge 48. The term 'Yoga-Diksa* means a rito which has its own importance in the Saive school. The e matter of fact, Diksa (initiation) is divided into two kinds, Jnanad iksa and Kriya Diksa (Yogad iksa). The first kind is conneoted with the intellect of an aspirant. It 

intellectually pur iries and properly equipe him for the second a iksa which is also classified au "godhonand "Yojan1". The funotion of the former is negativo as 10 purges the phys loal being, full of impurities. Tho gogona 

198. 

kind aotually unifies the spirit of the sadnaka with the Supreme Reality. 

SECOND ADHIKARA. 

Ν Ο Τ 

Ε 8. 

Verges 2-7. In the verges, various Dharanas (ooncentrations), regarded as essential parts of the Tan trika Sadhana, are elaborately mentioned. The author has pointed out the process of the gradual asoent for aelr realisation. The basis of this Sadhana is the oven grades (Sapta Pramatr Bhumikas) or Sive. The names of the grades (Sakala, Pralayakala sto.) are already explained in the notes on the 16th verge or the First Ashikara. 

It is the state or oreation and a Prematr never remains without his Salt 1. Thus in connection with thoso. Dharanas, seven Saktis with their soven Pramatrs should also be taken into consideration. 

Form (Svarupa) is also intimately associated with the Dharanas. It is the form on which a Prematr meditates. By form, we must take the essential nature or a thing. Everything, apart from its surfacial form (svarupa) has its real nature which the philosophers of the Saiva sohool call consciousness (citi). Every object or universe, though, outwardly it may appear in various forms duo to names and appearances (nama Rupa), is, in its essence, consciousness (Cidrupa). For example, man, apart from his physical forn, 18 cit Svarupa. Similarly the earth (Prthivi) apart from its nature of dullness (Jadatva) 18 Sivasvarupa in ita essential form. 

To take the real forn or an object in the process of Dharana is a significant element of the tantrika Sadhana 

implied by the seven methods nantioned in the above alokas. 

The whole nina bor or tko Panoada sariaw1 1s.fiftoon, 

1.e., soven Pramatrs, soy on their Saktia and ono Svarupa (object) on whion Prawatrs meditato. 

The founders of the school, keeping the tricho tomy in view, have reduced one pramatr with his sakti iuto svarupa gradually in ascending order and reached the final Dharana oalled trividhi in wh oh mantraaghegvera Panats is 

understood as Svarupa and Siva with big Sakti 46 Sesarded 

as Premata. 

All these seven methods refer to differentiation regarded as the state of Matr-liana-@ya. By Pranatr, Hana and Meya, we mean Sive, Sakti and Nara respeotively. 

The Saiva school or thought follows the mothod of the Tantrika Sadhana wh loh lays wuah caphasiu on the groue materials to reach the subtle or supreme Reality. It finds out the Infinite through the finito. 

To comprehend the whole poheme or tho sevou methods, it is helpful to arrange the various tattves in four groups laid dowa in descending order: 

First group - 1. Sive, 2. Sakti, 3. Sada viva 4. Isvaratattva, s. Sudaha Vidya. This group or the five tattveg is termed as Suddha Varga. In this claus, Siva ohiefly prevails. It is also tarnaça as a puro path (Suddha ad bra) in which Siva is all in all second group. 8-Maya, from this tattva onward the impuxo road begins A bit superior to this principle is Maanaya, who has intentionally been eliminated from tho sobou tho tativas by the Malini Sobool as it plays so imporüant. 2010 11 the g'ame. This group is mentioned as pure and nigus (zuhaha 

200 

(sud aha). 

Third Group. 7 Purusa, 8 Kala, 9 Raga, 10 avidya 11 Kala, 12 Niyati. Out of this group of the six oato gories, Purusa is an independent principle and the other five are his aspects. This group of the five tattvas including the Maya Tattua 18 daid to be six sheaths (Sat Kanouka). This group 18 also impure but not as impure as the other earth ato. are. 

Fourth group. 13 Prakrti, 12 mind (Hanap), 15 intellect (Budhi), 16 Ahankara, 21 five knowledge senses. 28 Five action senses. 31 Five subtle elements (Tan 36 Flve gross elements. 

5 en 

The first and the lowest method from whioh tho Sadhaka has to start, is the firteenfold method, in which the seven measurerg, their soven Saktis and the one object on which the measures with their Saktis meditate are in clad ed. For example, the earth or any other prino iple from the earth to the Prakrti is an object of meditation, which has technically been termed form (Svarupa). It is on this Svarupa that the seven Prematrs and the seven their Sakt is meditate. Thus the components of this Dharana are fifteen in number. This method is the lowest and is applied to the 4th group or beginning from the carth to the Prakrti (the whole number of the principles is twenty Pour) in ascending order. 

In the thirteenfold method which is applicable to the third group beginning from the Kala tattva to the Purusa, there is one Svarupa or Prameya. The six Pranatrs with their Sakt is are merged in the object or Pranoya. Hence the whole number is thirteen. In this Vidhi Pralaya kala Pranata predominates and the Sakala measuror who was mainly predominating in the Pancadaca vidhi assumes the 

201. 

It 

form of Meya (measurable) and his Sakti follows him. 1s trayodana vidhi. 

In the elevenfold method the Pralayakala who was measurer in the trayod esa vidhi becomes an objpot or the med 1tation (Meya) and the vijnana Kala oocupi the form of the main Pramatr. Besides, this method is also appii cable to the Maya Tattva when it is measurable. The merger of the Pralayakala Pramata along with Sakti whiobis mana (measure) should also be understood in this viani. : * 

Ninerold science holds the Mantra as a Main meagurer, whose Svarupa is vijnanakala with bis Sakti. Thug Vignanakala and his Sakti become one. The merging of the Vijnanakala along his sakti into Svarupa makes this Dharana, consisting of the four Pramatrs, four their Saktis and one object . 

• Sevenfold method has one Svarupa, one Pramatr who is, mantresvara, as a chief pramatr with his Sakti. The other superior measurers also continue to follow him.. 

In the fivefold method, the Mantresvara in Svarupa or Prameya, Mantramahesvara with his Sakti and Siva with His Sakti are measurers. Thus the whole number is fiva. 

It would not be out of place to mention here that the three methods from seven to three Vidhi, that is seven fold method, fivefold method and threefold method are pure methods as they conoern the pure 'group and therefore svarupa or Prameya in them is also pure. The measurers have to meditate on the pura Prameya (measurablo). 

In the threefold soience, Mantramabesvara is Prameya and Siva' with his Sakti is Pramatr. The signi floanoe of the triple Philosophy 11es in his last method 

202 

which shows the three Tettvas, 1.o., Mantra Mahesvara (Prameya, Sakti (mana and Siva all of which are the symbols of the ind ividual self (Nara) Sakti and s'iva respectively. (Nara Sakti 8ivatmakam Trikan). 

Thus the diversification beging from Siva and reaches upto earth in descend ing order. The Sadhaka : begins his Sadhana from the lowest prinoiple, 1.6., earth and attains Siva state gradually in the long run in the agcending order. All the methods above mentioned are 

ta bulated below: 

The table of the seven methods (Panoadasyadi Dharanas). 

Pramatr' 

" Pramatr 8 aktil. The name of 

vidhi. 

Total of the 

tattvas. 

! 

1.Sakala 

Pramatr. 

1. Sakti. 

I Sakala motora) on: 

the 

Tifteenfold Swarupa 1 Method (Panoa Pramatrs soit daga vidhi). Their Saktis 7 

EL 

OT 

tos. 

2.Pralayakala 2. Sakti. 3.Vijnanakala 3. Sakti. 4.Mantra. 4. Sakti. 5.Mantr esvara 5. Sakti. 

6. Mantramaho 6. Sakti. 

-gvara 

7. Siva. 

7. Sakti. 

a who remata 10 a Hidhi. 

1.Pralayakala 1. Sakti. 2.Vijnanakala 8. Sakti. 

Thirteenfold Svarupa method (Tra yodaga viant) Pramatry 

3.Mantra. 

3. Sakti. 

Their Saktis 6 

4.Mantreavara 4. Sakti.. 5.Lantramahe- 5. Sakti. 

svara. 

6.9 1va. 

8. Sakti. 

203 

1. Pralayakala 1. Sakti. 

Svarupa 

layakala co was gramatr in be Trayo fosa Yidhi. 

2.Vijnanakala 2. Sakti. 

Ninefold method 

(Nava i Vidhi) 

Pranatro 

Their Saktis 4 

3.Mantresvara 3. Sakti. 

4.Mantramahes- 4. Sakti. 

TP HT8 

5.9iva. 

5. Sakti. 

Svarupa 

antra, who has Pramata 

the Nava lahi. 

1.Mantregyara 1.9akti. 2.Mantramaheg- 2.Sakti. 

vara, 3.Siva. 

3.Sakti. 

Sevenfold Method 

(Sapta Vidhi). 

Promatro 

Their Saktis 

1.Mantra Mahe 1.8akti. 

-svara. 

Svarupa 

antresvars, tho was gramatr in The Sapt 

idhi, 

Fivefola 'Method fapt (Panoa Vidhi) 

Prematrs 

2.Siva. 

2.Sakti. 

Their Saltis 2 

1.9iva. 

1.Sakti. 

Threefold Method. 

Svarupa 

Vantresvara yho vas pra matr in the livefold 

1a hi. 

2.9akti. 

Prametrs Their Saktis 

- 

- 

- 

Verse 10. 

The position of a Guru is very impor 

tant in the Saiva School of thought. 

In most cases, he is 

regarded as 3lve. A Sadhaka cannot attain the status of Parama Siva in the Supreme state, unless he is uiried with the Sakti. The latter cannot be united with the former if a preooptor does not help him. For the process of libera tion, Guru, Dixga and Salt 1-Pata aro indispendable. These threo faotors are interrelated. 

The significance of the Quru lies in the fact that ho purifies the physical being of an aspirant by Sadhani Diksa, In the pure selr or the Sadhaka, Sakti enters and helps the preceptor to transform the Sadheka into suprema 

204. 

ieality by means of Yojani diksa. 

In some cases, without the help of the human guru a Sadhaka is directly transformed to the state of Supreme Reality. Due to these rere cases, we should not under 

egtimate the high status of Guru. This sort or spiritua lisation of a Sadhaka must be taken as preceded by the divine Guru that is siva. In any case, the high position of the Guru cannot be denied. 

Verse 17. The term 'Rudra Sakt 1gamavesa implies the well-know doctrine of Sakti-pata understood as essen tial key for self-realisation throughout the school of Saiva Sadhana. According to Sa iva canons, one Siva appears as many by means of his own free will. 

omes 

Ag inrinito Siva is rinitised by his own freedom, similarly He becomes infinite from his finite forms by his own Sakti. According to the Salva canons, the freedom or 

Svantantrya Sakti of Siva plays a double role. In both 

cases, one Sakti is called by two different names. When it abgourates the essential nature of siva, and makes him & Pasu (animal) it 18 Roddhri Sakti. The other Sakti is termed vikesini or Santa, due to which the Pasu or the bound (Baddha) is transformed to the state of Supreme 

Reality. 

In accordance with the Saiva Scheme of Liberation, nc Sadhaka is enabled to attain the status or Siva State, 

unless the Sakti intervenes and helps him in his spiritua 11sation. 

This intervening of Sakti or Sakt 1-Pata oan appear in a Sadhaka of an impuro and puro state. Ma., for the appearance of Sakti, has collectively mentioned five states or a su. and Su-Adhva. A Sad hala of the state of Panou 

205 

Mahabhuta, tattvas, atman, mantra and Sakti can be unified with the Balti oalled *Santa' and hence the Sastra has classified the Rudra Sakti Samavesa into 'Tive kinds, which aga in are arranged into Subdivisions. 

18. 19. 20. In the verse previous to this 18th verse, the entrance (Samavesa) or the Siva-Sakti is describ ed as it has five kindg. The five kinds are also mentioned there. Objections is raiged that the separate mention or , the Sakti Samavesa serves no purpose, because, all the Tattvas Bhuta etc. fall under the categories, therefore, only one Samavesa 1.6., Tattva Samavesa will surrice. In the word tattva' all these separately mentioned tattvas are included. The objection is removed. By the separate mention of these tattvas, the author means to lay emphasis on the principles and show their primary importance in the 

Samavesa. 

Bes 10 as, the other point of objeotion is the mention of the thirty kinds of the tattya Şamavosa as the Tattvas are thirty. In the philosophy of Trika, thirty six tattvas are mentioned everywhere. The mention of the thirty tattvas 1g curious when the number of the prino iples in this philosophy is thirtysir. Malini is 81lent on this objection. The Matrka school of Abiinava Gupta has dis cussed this question in the 13th A or T.A. To know the essence of the thirty categories, all of them are arranged in the three groups viz. Pure group from Siva to Suddha Vidya, pure and impure group, Mayatattva only and the third 

impure group from Kala to earth. In the first group, there are five tattvas, 1... Siva Sakti Sadasiva, lavara. Tattva and Buddha-Vidya which are the five aspects of one ultimate principle, Siva, who has been regarded as full of five Saktis (Penoa Sakti Sun ir bhara T.A. 9th A, 49) siva 

208. 

is divided as fivefold by keeping His rive funotions in view. These five functions oorrespond to the tive prin oiples, 1.e. 31va, Sakt 1, sto. T.A. 9th A.V.50. Thus thi. division is dependent on the primary nature of the functions of Siva who in reality, is one, full of Saktis and beyond the tattvas (tattvatita). 

The second group is Maya, which has been mentioned 28 Maya Sakti of siva and 1s identical with Him (Tadavya tirekini). It is the part and parcel of Siva and is oited as all-pervasive indivisible (Niskala) the cause of the universe and everlasting (Ma. 1st. Adh.). 26. Thus this Maya tattva does not have individual entity and hence it has been included in the Sakti of siva (Siva-Sakt yavina Bhavat) T.A. 9th A.152. . 

Maya Tattve has also two aspects, 1.. its baleno ed state (Samavestha) and un balanced state (Vigamat'agtha) Meya in its un balanced state, i.e. when it is disturbed (Ego bhama panna) creates the universe (T.A. 9th A.V. 158). Maya is also not counted as Tattva on the basis of its : balanced state, which is part and parcel of the nature of 

Siya, 

The third group, in which the thirty tattvas, from Kala to Prthivi are included, as a matter of fact, is the real number of the principles. The author has, kept this idea in view and therefore, he has mentioned as the thirty kinds or the tattva Samavesa. 

Verse 21, 22, 23. In the Saiva sohool of Philosophy the three means or upayas, viz. Anava. (Anava & amavęsa) Sakti (s aktasamavosa) and Sambhava (Sambhava Samavesa) upayas aro prosoribed for the three classes of the Sadhakas. The Upayas aro entirely based on the three207. 

states of Sadhana. The lowest state, called Anava, totally oonnooted with the puryestaka. In the State, Sadhaka stabilisee himself on the objects of materiality. He takes senses, body and other physioal things as congo ious 

In Anava state, these objects are understood as cittųttva'. Psychophysical complex or hiva (arirendriya) is supreme Reality. In short the ampir 10al experiene. predominates in the State. 

The basis of the Sakta State is mind regarded as the ground of doubts or Vikalpas (Cinta Avastha). It is a state of mind and totally dirfers from the previous one where in body and senses are primary. The Sadhaka of the state tries to rise from this mental plane but doubte 

(Vikalpas) oocupy him and he remains in the wavering position. The state, preceding to it, was entirely objective. It is the balanced state of subject and object. Neither subjective unity nor objective plurality stays' 

permanently. 

Sen bhava olaas implies the state, free from all dounts, (Cinta Suya avastha). It is the stato of subjce tive Reality, to some extent, it resembles the objectless tranca (nirvikalpa Samadhi). 

In short, the bases of the anava Salta and Sambhava Upaya ara body, mind and moul (Atna). 

For self-realisation, a Sadhaka or an objective state should adopt the anavo paya in which all the physical meang suon as Vegara, Karane, Dhyana, Varna and sthana'are primarily included. 

Uooara - tho toria Innown aq pranocoara in the 5th A of T.A. is apecially connooted with the Pranayana 

(breath control) syatan elaborately oxplained in th 

208 

Patanjala school of Yoga. Sva, T. also has stregsed the 

pranasamcara method as means for self-knowledge and stated 1ts process in connection with Diksa. 

By Vocara, we mean to have control over the various movements or the five winds (Vayu) called "Prana, apana, samana, Udana' and 'Vyana' which 'exist in the human miorocosm. A Sadhaka of an objeotive state should try to lead his prana Vayu upwards and check the downward tendenoy of the Apanavayu. After controlling conflicting movements of prana anda pana, the Sadhaka has to stay on the Samana Vayu, a symbol of balance. From this normal state onwards simultaneously twofold erfort is needful. The Sadhaka should continue his labour upwardly and Inwardly till he reaches from 'udana to vayana, a mark of the all pervasivo and subjeotive Reality. 

Besides, one has to bear in mind the conception of Kaladhvan with which vacakadhvan (varna-mantra-padas) 

is closely associated. The torm, uocara, also prints out that a Sadhaka of the anava olass should start hia Sadhana from pada mantra and varna gradually to achieve a supreme goal of life. 

Karana. The second term included in the anavo paya is Karana, which simply and literally means a medium, a device or a Sadhana to obtain something. Abhinaval Gupta has teohnically explained the term and olassiried it 

into seven kinds (or. Grabya-grabakacidvyapti tyagakse panivesanaih. Karnam Saptadha Prahuh eto. T.A. V A. 29. 

1. Grahya: Grahya and neya (measurable) are synonyms and refer to the objective state. All objeots or the empirical universe should be regarded as conscious - ness (oit). In other words the gross things pr materia 11ty should be taken as evolutions of one omnipresenti 

209 

subject. 

2. Qrahaka: By the term, the subjectivo I' or experienoer is taken. It exists everywhere and does not differ from the congo lousness (oit). 

3. Cit. The senge of consciousness should be trans -ferred to the emperienoer and not to the experienoed. It should be regarded as an only substance that experiences the whole moveable and imoveable universe in it and holds a pre-eminent position. 

4. Vyanti. 

It means the pervasion of the three 

energios of Siva, called technically, Para, Parapara and apark or Iccha, Jnana and Kriya. They, in their creative state, sustains all universe and, in the time of digsolut 1on, return to Siva and remain there as part and parool or 

his nature. 

5. Tyaga. 

The term, as a matter of faot, liter 

ally means to give or to sacrirloe. 

But here it is used 

in the senge of the threefold creation viz. Para-visarga, Paraperavisarga and apara visarga of oongo iousness re presented by the epithet 'I' or 'Ahem. Acoording to the 

Tryaca', all sounds should be understood as merged in the all-pervading conso iousness. The letter a' in the epithet is representative of Para Visarga and implies the universal self, Siva. It 18, according to the Trika Sohool, ma in source of all letters of alphabet. 

The joint position of the term 'Ah' representa Para-para Tisarga because both separately symbolise them selves as para and apara visarga correspond ing to Siva and Sakti respectively. It is a state of subjeоtivity plus objectivity. 

The apara visarga points out the impure class 

210. 

or oreation and inoludes the letter 'n' in it. 

The latter 

indicates a Dosest form of objeotivo otato which hag!. 

obgcurated the congoious nature of subjeot. For its com prehensive knowledge T.A. 29th A 140 should be consulted. 

6. Aksepa. The torm impliou that the Citi (Congoiousness) holding all the tattvas in ltuelt should be realised in human body (T.A. 25th A. 172). 

7. Sannivesa is to roaligo consciousness in the dirferent parts of body by the special postures of limbs (pudras). 

The term 'Karana' is taken in the senso or Vudra (a special posture of body) in Siva Sutra vimarśinī.. 

Dhyana. By the term, the author neang Intelli genoo which should be free from all sorts of objoots. 

Varna. The word has been translated as Tantra because it is Verna that makes Mantras, the reoitation of which is highly essential in the Anavopaya. 

Sthana. found in our body. T.A. 5th A 22). 

The term implies the various dalras 

(For their detailed explanation see 

Sakta 8 amavesa 19 based on wind (Aointa avanthu). The Sadhakas of this stato are advisod to meditate on thoir own selr. In short, tho term refers to mantra-yoga, Sambhava Samavega. The basis of this state le atua, which has been regarded as a stato, free from doubts. It should not be misunderstood as a supreme stato, The status of Supreme Reality is beyond 1t. It is an @gbential medium by which the Absolute can be realised very easily. 

Au regards the nature of this samavosa, va can say that it is a subjent sve čtate, trvo from all obfesta. 

211. 

The Saahaka of the state superimposes the idea of Bivahood 

on the various objects or univerpo. 

As regards the fruit of the Upayas, wo havu no difference in them. In fact the basis of the fruit 10 Sakti Pata for the actualisation of which Upayas (weans) end desira (Samvega) are significant factors. 

vo. 26-43. In the vorges five statea, viz., waking, dreaming, dreamless sleep, the fourth and beyond the fourth, which correspond to tho liva Saktis or Siva, such as, Kriya Jnana, Iccha, Ananda and Oit Sakti respect ively, are mentioned. As a matter of fact, Siva is one. and divisionless. In his activo stato, when Xa descends in the world, He, being one, changes Himsell into tho riva phases, which are technically tornod States ox avaathas in accordance with the funotions. Ho doss in his wordly stage. The technical desoription or the State is below. 

There are four means, by which, the mowiedge or a thing is acquired. They are - Praneya (measurable) Pramana (measure) Pramatr (measurer) and Praxa (the know ledge we get). 

In the waking stato (Jagrat), there for waan 

exist and the position of the Premaya 19 Primary. 

The whole univers 18 totally a irrarent from tho roal Pramatr, who is Slva and is regarded as luowable or Aahisteya (T.A.10th A. 233). In this state other suporior statos are also found but they ara sacondary and tlies Prameya (measurable) has its Primary domination (loya Bhun ir iyan Mukhya Jagrada Kayanyadantara, T.A. 10th A..840 The other names of this stata aro Piadastha and Sarvatde 

bhadra. 

- 

212. 

a buddha which is technically tormed as Jagrat Jagrat, Buddha (Lit. known) 18 oalled (Jagrat svapnal Prabuddha (Lit. speo ially knowa) is called Jagrat Susupta and the fourth is suprabuddha (Lit. absolutely known). It should be noted hors that the Turya (tho fourth state) is not combined with the Jagrat avastha (Jagrat Turya) in adoor dance with s. s.v.su 230 (Tripuoaturtham Tallavadasebayan, which means that the fourth stato (Turya), is mixed with the aforesaid three states 11ko o11. 

In the dreaming state (Svapna) the mental trend of the Sad haka is not towards the material objects. He does not hold them as real (Bahyabh imata Bhavanem Ayagra hanam, T.A. 10th. A com. 254). In this stato Pramana (Measura) stands pre-eminently and various mental tendenoios begin to come to an end. The state or non-differentiation rises and the Yogi proceeds towards the balance of mind 

The other names of the state ar Padastha and Vyapti. This state has algo four kinds, viz. gatagata (Lit. going and con ing) somet Inos nental balance goes away and sometime comes baok. Technically 1t is termed as "Svapna Jagrat, Suviksipta (Lit. voll." thrown) 1.0. mind is devoted to the full balanced state called Svapna-Svapna, Sangata (Lit, the mixing up of the mind with its balano od state) 19 Svapna Susupta and tho 

fourth kind 18 susamahita (Lit. perfeotly balanced) which has been named as a Svpne-Turya". 

In the dreamless sleep state (Susupta) the Pramatr (measurer) sees the exterior obfoots indifferently. There is no total ond or these as it is in the fourth state (Turya) (Natu Turya Dasayamiva Sarvatovigalan am (T.A.loth A Com. 262). The Prameya (measurable) and Pramana arol: thrown into a background and measures occupies the Primary 

213. 

position (Bukhya Matradasa Seyam) T.A.loth. 260). The other two names of this state are Rupastha and Mahavyapti. The four kinds of this state ares- uaita (Lit. risen), which 19 said to be 'Sugupta Jagrat", Vipula (Lit. Great) the Technical name or which is 'Susupta Svapna' Santa (Lit. Calm) whioh is regarded as Susupta Susupta and the fourth, kind is suprasanna (Lit. well pleased) which has been termed ag 'Susupta-Turya". 

In the fourth state (turya), the object, suporior to the Pramatr is sxperienced. The object is inclined to bring the supreme perreotion to itself. The form is not perfoot yet. The high spiritual journey is st 111 required. Though this stage is not the highest and final one yet it is totally different from Prameya, Pramana and Pranatr" (T.A. 10th, 266). Thor, is the total disappearance of all dis-appo intments. The state can be said to be as Sakti. Samavega' (T.A.l0th 265). 

All the differentiations of Meya, Mans and pra matr disappear and hence it is called quito calm but not as calm as the Turiyatita is (T.A. 10th. 871). The other names or this state are Pradaya (Lit. Gathering, 1.0., the whole universe seems united and hence heterogeniety goes : away) and Rupatita (Lit. beyond the form, 1.0., the state of Paragakti). Unlike the other states, 1t is divided into three kinds, viz., Manomanam (Lit. when mind leaves aside its main action) and wanders to and fro which 1s neationed as "Turya Jagrat'. In Ananta, there 18 the want or stability in mind attached to so many places and objeots. It is technically called as "Turya Svapne and the third kind is Sarvarth (all the world stands as the form of Sakti) as "Turya Susupta'. - The fourth kind, such as Turya-Turya cannot be possible in this state because the Samvit 

214.. 

(Consciousness) is not knowable (Vedya). It stands in the form of a knower and shines independently (T.A.l0th 275). 

Thefifth state, i.e., Turyatita (Beyond the fourth) 1s perfoot, independent and full or bliss. It is 

is said to be Parana Pada' (the highest). 

Keeping in view, the comon man', the Yogi and Jaanin, the author has mentioned the other names or the four states but this state has only two names, Turyat ita, commonly used, and Maha Prabaya used by Jnanis. It is. the pure state of consciousness and therofore no Yobio Name is used for it as all nød itationa (Bhavanas) como to an end horo. (T. A$ 10th. 279). There is perfeot spali gation in it and hence only one Inanio name 'Maha Pragaya 

times the other name, which Inanis used for 1ų la Satato dita (Lit. constantly risen, whion means the portsat balanoed state and novor comes to an end). Whion and which Pramatr comes und or wh loh and whion state is show by the following tables 

States. 

Pramatre. 

ramatu 

1. Waking state (Jagrat. 1. Sakala Pramatr Prayalakala 

Avastha). 

Pramatr. 8. Drearing stat. (Svapna). 2. Vignanakala. 3. Dreadless sleep (susupta) 8. Yantra Vantrosvara. 4. The Fourth (Turya). 

4. Mantra Mahesyara. 5. Beyond the fourth . 5. Siva. 

Turyat ita. 

Sakti is not Pranatr. 

1 

It is the objective 

215. 

phese. of siva, who has two aspects-subjective and objective. 

The five states with their chief marks, various names, various kinds, the three and the five Saktis of Siva, which prova11 in them, ars given below in a tabulated. form in the descending order (averoha Krama). 

Five states with their kinds and other names. 

1 

hree Saktis.' The other 

names of the State 

The names or Kinds of the five Saktis. tho Stato 

State. with their ohief marks. 

- 

1------ 

Para 

1.Turyatita. 

N11. 

Oit Sakti (1) 

Sakti. 

avastha, 

Jnanika Mahaprabaya Laukika Turyatita. 

Yattu purna 

navacohinna vapurananda Nirbharam 

Turyatitam 

Tu tatprahu stadvai pra 

mem padan. 

(T.A. 10th. 278) 

Jnanika 

8.Turyavastha 

Prana Bhumi 

Pracaya, 

1.Manonmana, Ananda Sakti 

Turya Jagrat. 

Yogiva Rupa 

tita, Laukika 

2. Ananta 

Turya. 

Turya 

Svapna. 

3.Sarvartha 

Turya 

Sugupta. 

216. 

raper & 

Jnanika 

8.9ueupta 

Iccha 8 akt1 (3) 

akti. 

Pracaya 

avastha 

Yogika 

Pramatr Bhui. 

1.Udita 

Susupte 

Jagrat 8.Vipula 

Susupta Susupta 

Rupatita 

Laukika 

Sugupta. 

3.Suprasanne 

Susupta 

turya. 

Jnanike 

4.Svapna 

BA 

Inana Sakti (4) 

avastha 

Vyapti Yogika Padastha 

Mana Bhumi. 

1.Gatagata, 

Svapna 

Jagrat 2.Viks ipta, 

Svapna 

Svapna .8.Sangata 

La ukika 

. 

Svapna. 

Svapne 

Sugupta 4.Sugamahita 

Svapnaturya. 

Doar a 

Jnan ika 

Jakt 1 

Sarvato 

bhadra 

Yogika 

Pindastha 

8.Jagrada : 1. Abuddha, Kriya 'Sakti 

vastha Meya Jagrat (). -bhumi. 

Jagrat 2.Buddha, 

Jagratsvapna 3.Prabud dhe 

Jagrat 

Susupta 4.Suprabuddha 

Laukika 

Jagrat. 

Jagratturya.217. 

These five states, as they should be reallsed by the Sadhakas in the seven methode (v1dhis-Pacadesa Vidhi ato.) aro tabulated in tho following: 

. 

Svarupa 

Pramatr 

Pramatri Sakti. 

Vidhi 

Stato. 

(Avagtha). 

& 

the other 

1.Sakala 

1.8akti. 

skala 

2.Pralayakala 2.Sakti. 

Yivefola nathod 

(Pancadasa v10h1). 

akalantara. 

Waking (1) 

: Dreaming (2) Draamless Bleep. 

3.vijnanakala 8,Sakti. 

4.Mantra. 

4.8akti. 

5.Mantrasvara 3.Sakti. 

6.Mantra- 

6.Sakti. 

Tho fourth (4) 

mahosvara. 

7.31ya. 

7.9akti. 

Sakala 

Beyond the fourth (5) Waking (1) Thirteenfold Dreaming (2) Method. Dreamless sleep (3) 

. 

ramatr 

Hith his 

Jakti. 

1.Pralayakala 1.9akti. 2.Vijnanakala 2.Sakti. 

3.Mantra. 

3.Sakti. 

4.Mantrosvara 4.8akti. 

The fourth. 

5.Mantra 

6.Sakti. 

mahesvara. 

6.Siva. 

6.8akti. 

Beyond the fourth. 

relayakala 

Inth hig 

Waking (1) Dreamless sleep. 

Elevenfold method. 

1.Vijnanakala 1.Sakti. 

(The only Prametr) 

2.Mantra. 

8.Sakti. 

3.Mantresvara 3.Sakti. 

The fourth 

4.Mantra 

mahusvara. 

4.Sakti 

5.9 iva. 

. 

5.Sakti. 

Beyond tho fourth. 

218, 

Unenakala ramatr with He Sakti. 

Hiuerola method. 

1.Mantra. 1.8akti. 2.Muntresvara 2.8akti. 

Waking. Dreaming. Dreamless Bloop (3) 

The fourth 

3.8akti. 

3.Mentra 

Mahagvara. 

4.3iva, 

4.8 arti. 

Beyond the fourth. 

antra with de Sakti. 

Waking (1) Sevenfold 1.Mantrasvara 1.Sakti. Dreaming (&) method. 2.Mantra 8.8 akti. Dreamless 

Mabesvara. 

aloep (3) 3.9iva Sakti The fourth 

3.Siva. 

Boyond tho 

fourth. 

Mantragvara 

Waking state Fivefold Dreaming (2) nothod. 

rith his 

1.The Sakti 

or 

Sakti. 

Mantr@svara 

1.Mantra 

Mahesvara 

(only) 

Dreamless aleop (3) 

8.Siva (only) 

2.Siva Sakti The fourth. 

Beyond the 

fourth. 

Yantra Vahesvara with his 

Waking (1) Threofola 

method 1.Jnana Sakt 1 Dronning (2). (Triviahi). 

of Mantra lahogvara. 

Iriya Sakti. 

2.Icoha Sakti Dreamless of Mantra Bloop (s) Dah@gva . 

Sakti or S1v@, 

Tho fourth 

1.9iva 

Beyond tho 

fourth 16 

a 

le 

" 

The tivo atatos already oltad are toohnically called 'Fivefold road (Panoadve). The thuaorola Road 

219. 

(Tridha edhya) 16 8lvan in tabulati forn' below 

Atma Tattva. 

Vidya Tattva. 

· Siva Tattya. Siva Sakti and Sada Slva 

- 

Sakala Pralayakala and vijnanakala. 

Ivora Tattva Suddha Vidya Tattva 

Grouping of all the tattvas into three alassou mentioned in the tablo 19 the main significance of the 

Trika Sasana which holds triohotowy in all respecta. 

.49. The suprere prinoiple or Seiviam a siva who has rive energles termed as 'Kala'. Keeping the evolution ary point in view, the author nee 4 {vided the four out of the five energies into the four eggs (andas) V1s. Parthiva Anda (related to Frthivi). Pralrta (related to Prakrti) Mayiya (or Muya) and Sakta (made or Sakt 1. Tattva). 

In de oond ing order, diva, who 1o the other of. oonso iousness (anakhya) has been termed as siya (oho Supreza) Really, this principla doos not come under the tom of Anda as it is all pervasive and evolves the other Andas. In tho following teble this prinoiple has been put into an Anda 

Form for showing the cvolution or other andas. The Prinary onerey, which pervades it, 19 called 'Santatita Kala. 

The first division, which as a matter of fact, comes out, in Sakt 1 which makes Sakta anda, full of Santa Kala. The second kind in Mayiya anda pervading the Bodhini Kale. The third Anda 1g Pralorta anda whioh has Pratista Kala. The fourth Division containing the Nivrttikala la Parthiva anda upto which the supreme Prinoipla evolves it. dell. It is the lowest form or the evolution. Thero 16 no further lowering or the infinite.. 

The ohart of these andas with their paxtloulaks, 1.2., Kalas, Tattvas, Bhuvanan, Varna, Pada and Mantras (not: mentioned in the texts) which make tho Sintold road (Sadadhva) ia kiven, in an asoana ing order, as lt 19 agaribed in the tort bolowt . 

220. 

I. Anda-Parthiva. It contains Dharika or Nivrtti Kala, 

one Tattva-Prthivi or Dhara, 8 teen Bhuvanas from Eulagni-Rudra Bhavana to Virabhadra Bhuvana, ono letter Koa' ona Pada Ksar and one Mantra. 

II. Prakrta anda. It has Pratista or Apyayini Kala, 

twentythree Tattvas, from water to Prakrti. Bhuvanas pirtys ix, Varnas, from Ta to Ha, Padas five, consisting or the five groups, viz. Ta, Tha, Da, Dha, Na (one group) Ta, the, Da, Dha, Na lone croup) Pa, Pha, Ba, Bha, Ma (one group) Ya, Ra, La, Va (ono group) 82, 8a, Sa, Ha (one group) and Mantras many. 

III. Mayiya anda. It consists of Bodhini or Vidya Kala, 

Seven tattvas, from Purusa to Laya, Bhuvanas twenty eight, Vernas two, Jh, Na, Padas two and Ventras two made of these two letters. 

IV, Sakta anda. It has Santa or Utpuyini Kala, three 

tattvas-Su-Vidya, Isvara end Sadasiva, eighteen worlds, three letters, Ka, Kha, Ga, one Pada and ono Mantra. 

A. It is 3 iva Pada, whion has Santatita Kala ori 

Avakasada, one tattva, Siva, Sixteen Varnas, from a to ah, on. Pada and ono Mantra. It is bayond the Anda stage and has no Bhuvana. 

B. It is the ether or conso iousness (cidalasa) which 

has been termed as "Parana" and from which all 

diversifications spring up. 

THIRD ADHIKARA. 

NOT 38. 

Ve. 8-15. In the verses, from the Tantrika point or view, origin of letters 1s mentioned. It is 

221. 

already stated that the froe will of Siva is regarded as a source of all creation. The author has named it as looha' and it is said to be an und ifferentiated form of the universe of phenomena and lotters. This Iooha represent ing unity, assumes its two forms called 'Inana and Kr'lya' gaktis, in the state or creation. Both, Jnana and Kriya are evolutions of fooha. The former represents the interior state of differentiation while the latter is externalised form of looha. These three states correspond to Para Sakti, Mahamaya or Su-Vidya and Maya. From the other point of view, the states also represent Para Nada, Nada and Matrka. In faot; 1t 1s Matrka or Maya from which letters are originated. 

In this conneotion we should also take the Mantra to whom Siva has entrusted the work or creation, into consideration. The Ananta creates all letters a ho hears in the Nada Stato (Tatsamangrutin varnan Tatsanichya nasrjat prabhuh, M.III. 27). 

As Icoha has two forms, similarly Matrka algo consists of two forms, viz., vowels and consonants corres pond ing to Vija and Yoni respectively. 

Both Vija and Yoni represent "Avikirna Avastha" (State of non-radiation. It is the state or radiation when Vija and Yoni develop into sixteen vowela a, a, 1, i eto. and Kavarga cavarga eto., groupinga, respeotively. 

The following chart will clarify the idea of Matrká as a source of the gross (Sthfila) letters: 

228. 

(Und irferontiatod atate). Para Sakti. Para vak or Para Nada 

II (Stato of dirferontiation not externalised) 

Nada, Mahamaya Orgu-Vidya. 

III (stato or differentiation sthula avastha) 

Baya, Matrka or Vaikhari. 

vija 

(Suara ) Non-radiated State. 

Yoni (Vyanjana). Won-radiated State. 

a, a, 11 uur rir lr e aio 

ou agn ah Radiated state. 

Kavarga Cavarga Tavarga Tavarga Pavarga Yavarga Savarga. Radiated stato. 

From the Tantrika point of view, all letters mentioned above are classiried into nine groupa viz. Vowel group (1) Kavarga (2) Ca - (3) Tav (4) Tav (5) Pay (6) Yav (7) Sav (8) Ksavarga (9) 

The ninth group 18 oalled 'Cakresvare" (of. Caku svaragahityena Navavargah (T.8.). 

Along these nino groups -nino Saktis Mahesi ota. 

are mentioned in the text. 

Acoord ing to the Tantrika school or philosophy, origin of sound algo implies the creation of the categorical universe which is mentioned, in brier, below: 

Sabda - 

- Akage 

Sparsa 

Vayu 

Rupa 

-- Jala 

Rasa 

- 

Jala 

Gandhaa 

---'Prthivi. 

Por detail, let us mention that all the Mantrag laro made of the vowels and consonants regarded as repro Bentative of the seed (Vija) and Yoni or Siva and Sakti respeotivaly. Accord ing to the Matrka school, a11 letters reprosent themselves as Sakti from which thirtysix 

tattvas spring up. 

. The twentyfive tattvas from Prthivi (earth) to Purusa owe their origin to the twentytive consonants from Ka to Ma, i.e., to say, the five Mahabhutas (material or gross elements), viz., barth, water, light, air and other, are the results of creation from Ka to Ma. The five tanmatras (substances or @gsenosa), viz., sound, contact colour, savour and odour spring respectively from oa to na. The creation of the five Karmondriyac (organ or action), viz., voice, hands, feet and the organs or the exoret ion and generation, is due to the five consonants from ta' to 'na' respectively. The five consonants from 'ta' to 'na' 'give rise to the five Buddhindriyas (organs of peroeption), 1.9., the car, the skin, tho eyes the tongue and the noro Tho flvo principles 1... Manas (mind) Ahankara (self-arrogation) Buddhi (intellect) Prakrti and Purusa (selr) como out of tho rive letters from Pa to Me respeotively. The four tattvas 1.0. Paga (limitation in ragard to interest lit. attachment) Vidya (limited Imowledge) the kala (the power of imited creation) and Maya (the generally limiting power) proceed from the consonants, Ya, ra, la and va. The five letters viz., Sa, Sa, Sa, and Ha rexpresent the five tattvas 1.. Mahamaya (graat 1llusion). Suddha vidya (truo or puro knowledge) Isvara tattva (Lit. Lordi iness) Sadasiva and Sakti, respectively. Thus Siva is not considered as oategory. Some of the Saivas include Siva also in the oategory and arop down the Maha Naya as a tattva. 

224. 

The oreat lon of the univeras, consisting of the Tattvas above mentioned, is based on the Matrkas from 

a to na and rinds its source in a which is all transcend ing Parama Siva of the nature or bliss and all complete in Finsolr. This a' is the Parama slve, who is technically termed as Anuttara' in the 3 aiva literature 

or Kashmir.. 

Philosophically and gramatically vowels are in dependent sounds and have their primary importance in the formation of nearly all the consonants. For instance, the consonants of the Ka, on, pa, ta and ta series boing serially the developed forms of " "1" " 

u r ! and Ir and like them gutturals palatals, labials, oerebrals and and dental respootively. Similarly 'ya' and 8a are but developed forms or 'ca'Ra and Sa or Ta Le and Sa or Ta; va of ta and pa combined, and "ha' is the developed form or visarga. In short, the miverso is an aggregate of the Matrkas from 'a' to 'hall and may be traced 'a' ag its source. In tantraloka sistosun Rudras are mentioned as the representatives of the sixteon vowels but among them 'a', whion is. Parara Sival! or Anuttara as it 18 termed, has been laid stress on. It is this anuttara or 'a' in which all the other lotters have their source. Thus the wholo material universo or the Matrkas begins from the a' which is 'a symbol of transcend ing 3iva and the universo created by this 'a' represents the sakti aspeot or imanental aspeot of the game all-pervading prinoiple. In the end the mystery of Siva and Sakti is found in the lotter "ka, which is but a combination of 'kall the developed form or 'a' or the Anuttara and 'sa' tho dovoloped form or Visarga or Sakti. It can be concluded in other words that it brings to light inueparability or onenes of 

28. 

Siva Sakti. 

Verse io. Sixtoon Rudras are mentioned hero and they represent sixteen vowels from whioh all consonants gpring up. 

Vorge 84. Thirty rour rudras and thoir Saktis represent thirtyfour letters from * to Ks. 

Varse 27. The Ananta, the first puro eroation of Sive is awakened first of all. In ma, this Ananta is said to be Aghora with whom the other seren lords are created. The lord hears all mounds in the Nada state and creates them in the state of Katrka. 

Verga 80. Sakt18 or Siva aro innumerable.. 18 their funotion due to which they are classified into three divisions, viz., apara, parapara ana para. The first kind degrades the anus and represents itself as a symbol of diversity. The second is a bit better than the previous one. It obstruote the fresdon (lukt inarga nirodhini) or the finite self and implios the Bhsda bheda (unity in diversity) state. 

The para sakti leads the limited sell to the status or suprema Reality and is understood as a symbol Or unity (Abheda). 

Verse 36. The formation of Sakta body mentioned in the verae ind inates the sense of purity which an aspirant has to infuse into his physical being. According to the Tundamental principle Servan Sarvatmaken Calvar every object of universo has its two points of view, objectiva and subjective. The hwan body from the objective point of view 1impure though from the latter point of view, 

is pure. The Tantriloa Sadhana lays much' onghasis on the 

226. 

subjective state, which cannot be entirely removed. For the transformation of the objective body into the subject ive one, the cultivation of Sakti in the former le necessity The formation of Sakta body and infusion of Sakti into 1t serve twofold purpose. Firstly it purifies the objeo tive body and secondly it enablos a Sadhaka to realise his true sell as suprešao Reality. 

FOURTH ADHIKARA. 

NOTES. 

Verse 4. 

The term 'Yoga' is used in its literal 

TE 

sense and meang unirication of something with the other. 

Verse 7. Simply Dikaa or initiation is a Tantrika rite, which purges a Sadhaka of his taints, imparts purification to his self and equips him for self realisation. Sometimes this self-purification (Atna Sanskara) comes from Sive who by his own free will, infuses Sakti into a Sadhaka and brings hin to the status of Supreme Reality 

Guru is an important factor in diksa. It is Guru who initiates his pupil and imparts hin Sakti. By the awakening or Sakti the Sadhaka gets himself liberated. 

Thus both, Guru and Sakt 1-Pata, are specially assooiated with the Diksa rito. 

Diksa is divided into two divisions. Jnana and Kriya diksa. The former is conneoted with budahi ot intellect and purges a Sadhake of his bauddha ajuana (intelleotual taints). The latter is assooiated with spirit or salt and removes the Paurusa afnana or the ignoranoo related to spirit. According to the Saiva!. Aganas, 1t is a fact that no Sadhaka la identaried with the227. 

Inrinito zelf by fnana-dikde-unless him innata impurity, ballo anuva mala, is destroyed by tho Kriya-aika. For the state or Para Mukti or perfect liboration, the purga tion of Anava Mala le entirely needful. In this respect the position or riya Dikra is superior to that or the Jnana a 1ksa. 

The Iriya i. Olassified into two kinds, Sodhand (purificatory) and Yojani (unifying). The function or the former is negative while that or latter is positive. 

Verse 10. 11. The two torms Adh innayonl' and Bhinneyoni' are very ambiguous and are used to denoto two gohools Matrka and Malini. Both are regarded a Baktig. They are conoeived on the basis of the two different alpha bet1oal orders at vague in the early part of the oth aen tury A.D. 

The alphabetical order of abhinneyoni Malini or Matrka rentions towels and consonants separately. 

The order of the alphabet, aooord ing to the Bhinnayoni Malini, is dirferent. The alphabetical order or this school is ourious and representa the comingling or vowels and consonants. In this ordor, vowolo Improg nate consonants. This order begins from na and ends in pha. 

Verses 19-28. Various Padas of the three Tsayas, parcpara Apara and Para pervede all the tattvas and the andes into which the former are divided. Yax, conprohon aive knowledge of them, their pervasion (Vyaptı) is skopa in a table below: 

828. 

Parapere Vidya. 

Various Pedag of the Vidya. 

Various Tattvas, 

Ота 

Aghoro. 

Parama ghoro. 

Ghorarupa Hah. 

doramukhi. 

Siva Tattva (with dakt1). Sadasiva.! 

Iovara pluh Su-vidya. Maya, Kela, Asu, Vlaya. Xale Wiyati. 

Raga. Prakrti. 

Bud ahi. Your gross alexonto ozoluding 

Bhime. 

Bhivana. 

Vama. piva. 

Ha 

Ru. ru 

Pivo subtle elements. Ylve sonses or aotion. Flvo songos or intelligence. Wind and Ahankara. 

Ra ra 

Phat 

HIUM Phat. 

Karth. 

The pervasion (vyapti) or Apara Vidya is as und er: 

Andag. 

Padag of Apara V 14 ya. 

Phat Hun, Hrim. 

Parthiva and Pralota Anda. Naye and sakti. 

Vyapti of Para Vidya. 

Letters of Para Vidya. 

Andao. 

Parthiva, Pralta and Maya Anda." Sakti anda. Beyond tho four andas. 

Au 

H (Visarga) 

Vorso 2%. In the verso, the position of Jamai and Yogi Guru is equal laed. The author surning up various 

kinds or Yoga and Jnana in the end of the Chaptor, has proferred Jnana to Yoga. 

Verse 28. The three kinds or Jnana, Sruta, Cintamaya and bhavanamaya, in fact, correspond to Bheda , Bhed a bheda and a bhoda phases of philosophy. By Sruta Jnana, the author means to say that the knowledge which a Sadhaka has from the Sastras. It. 19 said to be interior to the Pratibha or natural Jnana (intuition). The Jnana 18 styled as insane and helps thoso Sadhakas, who are entangled in materiality. 

Like the anayopaya, the basis of Sruta Jnana 18 physioal body or Puryastaka. The Cintamaya Juana rapre sents Bheda Bheda (Unity-in-diversity) state and is totally based on the mind regarded as a place of doubts (Vikalpa bhumi). 

By the bhavanamaya Jnana, we mean the pure, state of self (Atman) absolutely free from doubts or Vikalpas. This Jnana is connected with inner experience or intuition and represents as a nirvikalpaka state or obscotless trance. 

Summing up the three Jnanas, we can unhesitatingly say that the Sruta implios objcotivo. As regards the nature of Cintamaya, it is the state or subject and object and corresponds to the Savikalpaka Samadhi or Yoga sohool. The bhavanamaya 1a ropresentative or objetloss tranco. 

The ohart of the three Jnanas with chief marks is given belowi 

230. 

Inana 

w 

Sruta objeotive. 

Qintanaya (Subjootivo plus 

objective). 

Bhayanamaya 

(subjootivo) 

Nanda bhyasta. 

gva bhyasta. 

Verse 33. The term 'Yoga' means physical Yoga and refers to the Yoga school of Patanjali. It is divided into four classes, praptopad esa, Ghatamana, 8 iddha and Susiddha or Sida hatama. 

Praptopad oga is an @lerontary state or a Yogin who learns various methods of Yoga from a good precoptor, and practises thom. 

The Chatamana refers to that olass of Yogin who controls the tendenoies of his astraying mind. It is en un balanced state of mind. 

Siddhayoga means a balanced stato or a yogin, who 18 absolutely stable in the objest or his meditation (Samadhi). 

Susiddha is the symbol or objeotless tranco (Nirvikalpaka Samadhi) and represents perfect stability of mind. Disturbance of any kind cannot betray his kontal equilibrium. 

Ma. has stressed Sus iddha as guperior bocaugo it 18 a combined state of Jnana and Yoga or theory and practice Intuitive experience without Sastra-Jnana is not agreeable to the Trike school. s im Llarly tho Sastre-Jnana devoja or intuition is not acooptable to la. ! 

The four states a Yogin with their aistinotive 

charaoteristica aro tabulated bolow: 

Yogin 

(1) Praptapadesa (8tato or aoquls 1tion). 

(2) Whatmana (avering stats). 

(8) 8 idaha (State of stability). 

(4) Siddhatama or Susidaha (State of porteat stability). 

IIYTH ADHIKARA 

NOTES 

Bhuvanas are a part of sixtola road technically called 'Sadad hran' whion is a ivided into two heads viz. Vacakadhvan and Vapyadhvan. Every one of thean from the Trika point of view, is olassified into three divisions 1.6. Sthula, Suksam and Pera (Cross, subtlo and beyond subtle). As regards the Vadakad bvan, it' consists or Varna, Mantra and pada, symbolised as Moya Mana and Matr, corresponds from the Trika point of view, to siva, Bakti end nara. Similarly the Vaayadhvan also consists of Kala tattva and bhuvana, understood as three different ways for self-realisation, and corresponds to the para, sukama and 

sthula. 

One hundred and eighteen Bhuvanas mentioned in the 5th Adhikara aro distributed among the four andas referred to in the socond Adhi, of Me. To every one of four andas, Parthiva, Prakrta, Maya and Sakta, tour Kalas, called Nivrtti, Prat istha, Vidya and Santa are allottod, respootively. To Siva Tattya, regarded as andatita, santatita Zalo is attribute. Like the four masters of 

838. 

the four andas (andadhistata) called Brahma, Vienu, Rudra and Isvara, masters or Bhuvanag (Bhuvanesa) are specially referred to in T.A. 

As regards the differezo0 between the masters of andas (Andadhistata) and the masters of the Bhuvanas (Bhuvanesa), the former are inferior to the lattor. The class or bhuvanegas has twofold body called Mayio (made or maya) and va indava (a body consisting or maya as voll as or Su-Vidya) doha. It is the latter quality due to which Bhuvanesas have divya Jnana (divino lowledgo). By this Jnana, they can initiate their servants (Prerya) and can work as Guru but this capao ity leoks in the masters of the andas (andadhistatr) because they are not above the level or Maya. Their body is also Haya-made. They are totally devoid of the contact or su-Vidya Whioh is a main faotor to bring the Bhuvanesas to the status or superiority. 

For the detailed pervasion or the Bhevanas, see diagram in the sixth Adhikara notes. 

SIXTH ADHIKARA. 

NOTES. 

In the wholm adhikara, anganyasa, a religious rite, is treated in detail. In general, it is connected with all the religious ceremonies of India and in partit cular it is understood as most important part or the Saiva rites. The first neosssary stops which a spiritual socker has to take aro Bhuta-Sudahi obtainablo through anganyasa. In fact it helps d 1ksa to transform the Mayiodeha (body made of Maya) to kundalinidohe whioh is again conneoted into the Saktadaha. 

Keeping three classes or mon, viz. dvaitavad in 

238. 

dvaitadvaita Vaaln and advaitavadin, in view, the author has divided it into three divisions, called apara viani, Paraparavidbi, and paraviahi. The cxplanation of-there | anganyagas with their demonstbativo charts 1o givon in 

Ita proper place. How 16 sufrloos to pay that no Sadhalaa without a proper anganyasa can be admitted into a Baiva initiation, 

Verga 8-B.. When a Sadhaka has to redoivo the in it iation of knowledge, he is advised to consider all the prinoiples in his own body (niorocoam) for the purpose. The Sadhaka und er initiation is ordered to perfor various Anganyasas which have been mentioned according to the threefold method, vis., Apara V1021. Parapara viani and Para Vidhi wh loh point out thro. Philosophies of Dualien, dualisms non-dualism and non-dualiw, respectively. As already mentioned all Tantrik Sadhanas begin from obvious and gross substances and co up to subtlo ones. The Sadhaka has to nod itate on thirty six tattvas in his own body which has the measure of eightyfour fingers, from feet to rore. head. Thus he begins his Ange Myaga from Dhara Tattva in feet to Sadasiva tattva in the forehead. Thus the remain ing two prinoiples that is Sakti and Siva aro supposed as porvading the whole body and are eliminated from the thirtysix principles. All those tattvas are sllustratea Oin tho Sadtr insat tattva Nyasa Vidhi in the following: - 

23. 

The body of a Sadhaka fron fest to forehead 16 84 ringers. The four fingera space tron the soles of the roat upto ankle (@alpha), 1 govazed by the opthao Phara tattva. The fortysix ingorge space from the fingers *4' to '48" in the chart, la soversa by the following prino iples Tala (wator), 2-Agai, V-Vayu, A-Akach, P.T. Panoataamatras, D.I. Dasa Indriyas (tan senses) indy Aha-Ahankara, Bu-Buddhi Tattve and Pre-Prakrti. Every one or the tattvas bas only two fingers space. The eightoen fingers' space from the fingers 48 to 18 de covered by the categories - Pa-Purusa, Ra.Rage, Asu V Aauddha Vidya, Ka-Kala, N1-Niyati and Kala. Eyaryone of then has thres fingerer spaoo. Tho space of sixta a fingers from 18 to 18' 18 covered by the M-Kaya-Su-- Suddha Vidya, I-Isvaratattva and Bada Sive. the remaining two prino iples Sakti and Siva pervade the wholo body as they are all-pervad ing. 

9-10, 11-18. Au in Seatr insat Tattva Wyasa, & in ilarly in Panoa Khandadhvanyaga and Trikhanda Tattya Nyayasa, the body of Sudhaka should be supposed to be at 84 ringers, because all those methodo ars inoluded in Apara bidhi' which 1s symbol of dualica. 

Panoa Tattva Nyasa moans that live Tattvas, 1.0., Panoa-Mahabhuta (rive xoss elements which ran the body or. the Sadhaka). 

Panoa Khandadhvanyase desoribes the pervasion of the five pure tattvas 1.0. Maya-Suddha Vidya, Isvara, Sadasiva and Salt 1. Out of these rivo puro principles, only four tattvas from Maya to Sadesiva porvad. eightyfour ringers' measure of the body. Tho Sakti principle in this case is said to be all pervading. 

similarly trikhandatattva Viani mentions only 

235, 

three tattvas v1z. 'Atma Tattva. Vidya Tattva and Siva Tattva. It is the chief obaracteristio of the trika philosophy that it orr and on, hints at the triple thought which is the fundamental charaoter of Kashmir Saiviou. According to the Tantrika philosophy, it is an approach to the supraphysioal Reality-through the physioal universe, a Journey from gross materialism to tho subtle principle" : and a graap of subjectivism, through objectivisa Trikha ndatattva consisting of the three Tattves 1.8'Atma Vidya and Siva Tattva is a symbol of the thres pr ino iples - Nara" Sakti and 'Siva' of the trika science, respectively. 

. 

Likewise Bhuvanadhvanyasabidhi degoribes 118 worlds which are supposed to be in the bod 11y mansion of the Sadhaka. In this case also various corporal organs which have collectively been moasured as oightyfour fingers, are regarded as possessing suoh and such worlds. 

The oharts of the above mentioned Nyabae are given below with their full desor iption: 

. In the Pancakhandadhvanyaba, the frayure Maya Tattva ocoupies four fingers space, from feet to ankle. Suddha Vidya Tattva hag fortysix fingore space whion begins from 4' to '48. Twentytwo fingers' space sztuk buius from 48' to '28' la covered by the Isvara Tattva. The space from 28 to 12. le oooupied by the Sada Siva Tattva. The remaining Sakti principle which is a meta physical Reality in this case, pervades the whole body. 

The Diagram of the Pancatattvanyasa is given 

below:In the Pancatattvanyasa, the earth (Dhara) covers tour fingers' space from the coloa of fact upto the ankle. From 4 to 46, that is, fortytvo fingers i space is covered by Jala (water), fron 46 to 22, that 19, twentytwo fingers* spaco is held by the Agni (fire). From 82 to 19 1.0. twolvo rincorse space is covered by the Vayu (wina). The akasa pervades the wholo body. 

The chart of the trikhandatattvanyada 1o as 

und er: - 

238. 

In the Trikhandatattvanyasa, the Atma Tattva, it Covers than fest for the throat (Kantha Kupa), 

that is 72 fingers. Twelva fingers' apach from 78 to 18, is covered by the vidya Tattve. The Siva Tattva pervados the whole body. 

Vorso 19-21. In the verses the Varnanyasa, accord ing to the Apara viahi, is mentioned. All letters ars arranged in the nino groups. Tho pervasion of tho groupe is given in a chart below: 

In Varnayasaviani, four fingers' space, from teet to 4 la uovered by the first group, a' to Visarga. From *4! to (8) might fingers' apaoo is occupied by the second group 'Kavargal. The third group 'Cavarga' covers the space of a fingers, from 8 - to 8.. Ten ringers apace from .g' to '10' 18 occupied by the fourth group "Tavarga.. From 10 to 10 tea fingers' space la nold by tho fifth group tavarga. From 10 to 10 to Singers: space is covered by the sixth group "Pavarga Prow 10 to 15 riftoon ringers space is occupied by the seventh group 'Yavarga Nineteen fingers' space from 150 to 9198 1s held by the eighth group avargal. The ninth group whioh consists of only one letter "Koa' pervades the whole body. 

The bhuvananyasa, accord ing to the apara vidhi, 19 tabulated below: 

840, 

. In the chart of the Bhuvananyada, on the left side all the Tattvas containing various Bhuvanas on the right are mentions. The body from foot to forehead, 10. supposed to be mightyfour fingors. In the reverse orda the dhara contains four fingers! apaoo, from 1 to 4, in which 16 bhuvanas, from 1 to 16, aro also mentioned. 

Trom Jala to Akaga eight ringers' space in oooupied by the group of the might bhuvanas, patyastala. 

Eight fingers. spese, from Gendha to sparsala 

contained by the Ouhyagtaka group of Bhuvanas. 

Eight ringere space from Sabda to Payu, is hela by the Atiguhýastaka group. 

Ten fingers space from Pada to Ragana 10 covered by Seven Bhuvanas, rron sthanu to Rudrakou 

The space from Caksu to mana is held by the 

Sthanvastaka. . 

Ahankara is held by the Chagalanda bhuvana, 

Devastaka group is situated in the budahi tattva containing two fingers' spase; 

Yopastaka is found in the two fingers' space of 

Prakrti. 

Vama Bh ima ugra and' bhava bhuvanas exist in the two fingers' space or Purusa, Besides Isana and Ekay are also found there, 

The bhuvanas containing the number 10, 20, 18 82, 83 exist in the three' fingers' space of raged 

T29 Bbuver 

84 and 6$'bris 

fingers' space of asu-Vidya. 

The Bhuvanas of 26 and 87 live in the Kala or three fingerso space. The bhuvanas or 88 and 87 live in the Kala of three fingers space. The Bhuvenas of 88 and 89 live in the Niyati or the three fingers spaco, 

The Bhuvanas or 90, 91 and 92 cover the three fingers' space of Kala. Bhuvanas from 93 to 100 live in the Maya tattve of four ringers' space. 

The Bhuvanes from 101 to 105 occupy Su-Vidya of 4 fingery space. 

The Bhuvanas from 108 to 111 belong to Isvara Tattya or four fingers' space. 

Bhuvanas belonging to 112,115,114,115,118,117, 118 are situated in the Sadasiva tattva. As regards the giva Tattva with the Sakti, 1t pervades the whole body. 

Before we mention the pervasion of the 19 Padas of the Parapara Mantra to quote the same here again is proper: - 

19th, 

First Pada 3econd Pada. Third Pada, Fourth Pada. 

Fifth Pada. 

(om) (Aghore) (Hr in) (Paramaghore) (Hun) (Ghorarupo) :-) (Ilah) (Gora Mukhi) (Bhine) 

Ravorso (Bhisano) (oma) 

18th. 17th 16th 15th. 14th. 13th. 12th. 

Sixth Pada. Seventh Pada. Bighth Pada. 

Ninth Pada. 

Tonth Pada.. 

loth 

Eleventh Pada. 

961 

Oth 

7th. 8th. 

8th. 

Twelveth Pada. Thirteenth Pada. Fourteenth Pada. Tirteenth Pada. Sirteenth Pada. Seventeenth Pada. Eighteenth Pada. Nineteenth Pada. 

(Plva) (Ne). (Ru Ru) (na na) (Phạt). (Hu) (Hah) (Phat) 

(4th.. 

Sra. 

In the table showing parvasion of nineteen Padas; caloulation should be begun in the reverse order, 1.0,, from the last Pada Phat to Om whloh lo considered the ninetoonth Pada and which pervados the whole body. 

. In the t'ext the pervasion of it is shown in Apara Vidhi in whion the body or Sadhaka should be oonsidered eightyfour fingers. The pervasion or nineteen padas means the pervasion of 'Parapara Mantra'. 

243. 

. In the Chart, from the fact to two, thoro is found the first Pada (Phat) in the roverso order. In '... the space from 2 to 8, tho seoond Pada (Hah) should be considered. The third Pada (hun) govora two pintora space, from 2 to 2. The fourth Pede, (Phat), lo realisod in the space, from a tó a. The rirti Pada, (ha xa), las the space of a fingers tros e toa. The sixth Pead, (Ruru), covers 8 fingers' space, fxon 8 to 8. The place or the seventh Pada, (he) is eight fingers, from a to 8. The eighth Pada, (Piva), covers the ten fingers space, from 8 to 10. The ninth Pada (Vama) has tho space of one ringer from 10 to 1. 

One fingera' space, from 14 to 1 1s covered by the tenth Pada (Bhiqana). The oloventa Pada (@nino) has the space of air fingers, froD 1% to 18 volvo fingers' space, from .8. to 18, is hold by tho twelvath Pada (Choramukh 1). The space from 12° to 'So lo covered by the thirteenth Pada (Hah). The tourteenth Pede (Ghorarupe) has five fingers space from 5 to 86 Pro fingers space from 5 to 2! is occupied by the 25tk Pada (wa). Two fingers spaos, prom go to 8 io hold by the sixteenth Pada (Pranaghoro). Ouo ringora apasa fron 30 to 'l' is covered by the seventbonth Pada (Lxin). Again one ringera' space from 1 to 1. is covered by the eight @enth Pada (Aghoro). The nineteenth Pada (om) pertados the whole body. 

26. Paraparaviani la a bit superior to Aparaylan1 as it is partly a physical and partly metaphysical approach to the final Boaut itude. In accord 4109 with the hothod, 

the body or a Sadhaka is supposed to consist of ninetyuiz 

• fingers from rest to Brahma Ranahara. Similarly the 

Para Viani is a purely non-dual and os supraphysical axivo 

to the transcendent. The uteguro of the body accord lag to this method, is one hundred and olgut. Tho Baahaka has to consider all the thirtywiz prizo iples in this measure or the body. The mention of the Triplo method 18 a proof that the Trika thought is a blend of threo, philosophies and lays equal stress on 'eli or them. 

Sat Trinsat Tattvanyaga, according to Perapara Vidhi, is given, in a chart, below: 

245. 

From the solos of foot to figure , in tho ohert, the four fingers apaco is held by the Dhara Tattva - - Jala. A-Agni, Ya-Vayu, A-Akasa, P.T. Pancatammatras, d. 1cm Dasa Indriyas, Mwanas, Aha-Ahankara and Buddhi cover 66 fingers' space, from 4 to 66. The four fingers' space from 68 to is held by Prakrti. 10 fingers apace from 4 to 18 is held by Purusa to Kala. Sixteen Pin corso space from 18 to 18 is occupied by Malaya Su. VI-Su Vidya; I-Isvara and Sada-Sada-Siva. Siva with his Sakti porvades whole body. 

Verse 27. Two kinds of letters aro Matrika Varna and Malini Varna. The letters of Matrka schools are from 

a to Ksa, as they are found in the alphabetical order of Senslr it and present. The Alphabetical order of Malini is ourious and begins from "Nao and onds in Pha. Again this twofola division is or six kinds, y1z. Matrka-Mantr, Matrka Pada (3) Matrka Varna. Sunlarly threo linds or Malini should be known. 

Va. 27. Tho Sadhaka so ordered to make three fold division of everything in the triune system or Kashmir Sa ivism. The trinity applicable to the 'sixtola Path is as given below: 

1. Gross (sthula). 2. Sukena (Subtle) 3. Para (Beyond the subtlo). 

These three terns can be expressed as universe individual and infinito respectively. 

Votaries or Trika philosophy desoribe the trinity as 'Nara, Sakti and Siva which aro symbolised as 98thula, Sukama and Para". 

Sixfold path lo firstly olassified into two kinds 

243. 

viz. 'Vacukadhvan. Again everyone or thou haa vacakadhvan and vacyadhyan. The first contains Varna, maxtra and pada. The second consists or Kala tattva and bhuvana. 

The following verso or T.A., in connectionx with this threorold division, 19 remarkablo: 

Trikadvaystra pratyekan athulam sukeman paran vid uh Yatosti tona sarvayamadhva sadvidha uoyate. 

SEVENTH ADHIKARA. 

1. special movements or postures of tho body are called Nudras. Keeping these movements in view, they are classified into four divisions 1.e. the postures dono by the body, hands, Bpoooh and wind. Various lsudrad montioned in the Tantra Sastras and Ma. V13. ought to be done by these a bova oited limba T.A.33 1.9. 

Their importanoo as a part or initiation is very high because they train an aspirant to keep his body 11t and under propor alaoiplino for tho spiritual Realisation. In this respoot they destroy the Potters or tho univorse (Panas). 1.1 berato Sadhakas from all bondages and lead ther to the supreme goal. The otymological meaning of the Mudras nentioned by Abhinava Gupta in T.A. lo alco siunilar (T.A. 38 A.49). 

Besides they are said to bo or three kinds because. thoy ara forned by body speech and raind whioh is not 'other than tho Oit Sakti (consciousness) 1.A.38 A.40, 

Our text does not pay attention to deporibeLudres elaborately. But Abhinava Gupta a 10 not fail to mention the double role of the Mudrad. Viratly thoy quo not highly required for the spiritual Badhakes. They are primary for only those who have kept fruito in viow. In this roapeot, thoir primery posit10n can not be denied. T.A. $2 A. According to T.A. they have only a secondary position. Conolud ing reaark on the position of the Mudrey in the 67th verse of T.A. SR, proves the very important as they help spiritual Realisation and brings to the spiritual aoskars into coramunion with the Supra@ Baing. They help Sadhakas to remove so many doubts and obatruota ions whiloh stand in the way of their destination. The special ut 111ty of the Mudras, which is strecked ty Abhinava Gupta is a mastery over the circle of the Mantra. T.A, 58 A. 67. 

As a matter of fact, Ma. vll the Mutsae tho energies of siva (siva-sakti). From this point of view performanoe of Mudras is very important. In this respost, they also help to tranefer a Badkaka from the layio local to Sakta State from which the supremo state le casily attained 

From the theoretical point of view, the first six chapters of the work are very important. They are, 18 m11 respects, complete. In the remaining chaptera, sono verses are incomplete and their coxzost sonce is not ruderatoode The work is based on the thirda manuscripts existing in the Researon 11brary of the state Government in Srinadas and I studied the personally to flad out guy sourco to completo the missing verses. I am sorry that I got ao bint and 

I translated them in their laconploto roxas 

In the Sevent: Adhikaxa, cho 3oventi aad ebo 

eighth versa are 1xcompleto. 

LICHTE ADHIKARA. 

The Chapter contains all tho particuları or a Sadha aiksa with whion the dootrine or prata or wahaprota is olosely associated. The conooption pf this doctrino can be explained in two ways. Firstly, the Saiva Sohool or Thought resoen ises everything as real because 16 18 tho dovelopment or 010 Sakti, understood as an eagontial nature of the Suprono Reality. Take any object of the 

universe and it is accord lng to the system, an evolution of Sakti. Ir 1t is devoid or Sakti, the School will certainly regard it as a corpse (3ava). From the Salta point or view, everything is Sakti. Ir it is without, it, it is as good as a dead body is . 

The second implication or tho doctrina is that a seeker of truth, in his gradual 230ent, should trans oend overy thing and roach tho Supzone Reality. According to this process, as the system mentions, after the Suddha Vidye, the realm of the siva State bogins, ordinarily. this state is divided into thrse divisions, Isvara, sada Siva and Siva. A spiritual Sadhete, for the attainment or tho Siva State, which is regarded as a pormanent seat or cit Sakti, should transcend the Ievará and the Sadasiva. In view of tho 9 lva state, both, Isvara and Sadan iva atatou are said to be dead or prata and nahaprota zospa ivoly, as they have no olt Sakti 12 them. The point vosth noting is that the syetem doon not believe in these two atatoe as the Supreme State. Both of them, from the Satta yoint or view, have been rogarded as a coryse because they are devoid or Sakti. The votaries or Bakti do not hesitate to regard von Siva ea doad 11 36 19 dovoia of Sakt. Hanco, Sakti, in the syster, has a prezident plaoo. 

249. 

The montion of the preta Sadhane rotorrad to in Ma. eth., 68, and 03 15 vory obscuro and for to compEO hensive knowledge, the dootrioo ct prona pansara and six granthin, elaborately explained in S.T. 4th. P. dloula algo be taken into cons 1d eration. 

One more striking feature of the Sadhaka dikoa 

19 ita reføronoo to the dootzino of mac1000 Bin and mox0o0 . 

The Saiva Sohool never recognises the objeats of 200r000 su as fut11e. It wophas ises that the obicoto ezioting in the macrocosm should be realised in the micrococa, which, in all reapeots, 18 centra of dit Sakti. In this respect, there is no difference between the outer and the lunar 

world or macrocosm and niorogosu. 

NINTH ADHIKARA 

но ТВ . 

Tho Chapter is specially associated with a Saiva ger emony and dononstrates the fut1lity of the world. The first twenty verses of the text soon obscure in their meanings. Thay ara, es a matter of fact, coin cated with the formation or the Mandala (a religious altez). 18 the whole chapter, thero is no profound philosophical point, 

The first and the 64th. vorscd aro Incomplete. 

TENTH ADHIKARA. 

BOVEN 

GIS 

. 

The chapter deals with mapoolel reilaloua #ita, called abh iala. A nan, who is admitted into the 'Siva yoga and has got necessary training of the oult, cannot be competent to impart tho Saiva diked to hio ota pupil 

250. 

unless such powers aro delegated to him through this site. After this rite he is competent to do any, work he 11kos. 

The verse 11th. is incompleto. 

SLWENTE ADHIKARA 

ELL 

NOT X S. 

The chapter ventions Siva-hasta-viani, a daiva rite, by which Salt i-pata of a Sadhaka is detenuined. 

TWEILESIH - SIXTEENTH ADEIKARAS. 

NO TE S. 

In the adhikaras, from the tvolereth to sixteenth, various ahararaot thirty-six tattvas ara nontioned. The method of 8anhana adopted by the Tantrika School 16 golon tipic. It starts its Sadhana from the lower centres and after transcend ine it. reaches the higher ones. Tho school of Sankhya and the Advaita Vedanta start from tho hipher centres and overcome the lowor oncs From the tantrika po int of view, a Sadhaka should meditate on the tattvas and after his 18 entification with the objeot should transcend it in order to verify himself with the Supreme self. This process is technically called stattva bhedana" or Bhumika jaye. 

SEVENTEENTH ADHIKARA, 

NOT BS. 

The adhikara le speciall connected with the various kinds of Pranayadas which are olaborately doalt. with in the Patanjala yogadarsana. Besides, sowe aharanas are also pointed out.. 

Some portion of the ysra város is missing in this 

831. 

adhikara. 

LIGHTSINTH ADHIKARA. 

This aabikara lays muoh cuphasis on tho apirit (atman) which, according to the school, la situated in the heart. It is called Spanda (vibration). The author strongly recommends the worship of this l'inga. As to learn from the text, the phollus-sorship Is a xow syrabol of the inner lange, and aspiranto ato advised to tako it 

in the same light. Inspite of the Salta character ol the work, the author has emphatically proved the monist: spirit of the system and admitted Siva as the Supreme Reality 

NILETEENTH ADHIKARA 

GLED 

The chaptor elaboratoly axplains tho Kula puja, a specifio rite of the Kaula Seot, closely connected with the Saiva School. It is already wentioned that tho Kaula oult is a part of the Saivien.. Both, Kaules and Salvas admit Siva as Supreme Reality. The main airteronco that exists between the two Schools is that the Kaula baliovas in the imanence or Cod while to tho Salva or the Trik School, the Reality is both, fumanent and, transcendent. 

To be a parteot Kaula, a Sadhaka anould vandar in cities, towns and villages for four days and opend at least one night in overy one of the places. Ho 10 directed to worship the Xulssann (giva) there. 

sone portions or the 18th, tho 18th and tho 3941 verse are missing in the text. 

TWENTIETH ADHIKANA. 

The chapter deals with mowledge, oalled Sakta Jnana. This jnana ia symbol or Siva and Sakti and is. classified und or two heade, Rupa and Rupatita. By tho forner, that joana is meant which we get through our senses. The latter sofers to the knowledge which 10 out of the human approach. In other words, the fisst 19 objective. As regards the nature of the second, it is absolutely subjeotive. Besides, two more kinds of this Jnana are rarerred to. By the first kind, bhautika, objec tive knowl.180 la neant. The decond kind, at ivahika, is specially connected with the spiritual knowledge. 

TYENTY-FIRST ADHIKARA. 

The chapter contains tho partioulard or tho twa yogio methods, 9anlanti and Candralrati. Tho Piret method explains how to enter into a dead body wh310. t sooond points out how a 'Sadhaka can be master of the moon. 

TWENTY-SECOND AND TWENTYTHIRD ADHIKARAR. 

The chaptors aro not connected with any new Sadhana. They point out that Badhakes can obtain ortre ord inary 8 saahis by meditations on part louler mautras and wheels (Cakras). 

PART III. 

(Append iz and Indor) 

Part III. 

Ps 

VIII - Appendix. 

1. Origin of Tantras - Tantras are mainly derived from the Aramas which have been understood, 11ka the Vedas, revelations. They are orally handed down from teachers to pupils. The traditional account of their origin, aocording to the Saiva School of Kashmir, is that all the Sastras, in their unmanifested state rema in latent in the All-transcending Para Vak or Supreme Logos, which, in fact, is a supreme will of Siva. It iu tho suprome state of oneness wheroin no differentiation: or any kind is experienced. As soon as the manifestation or universe begins, the undifferentiated state of the Para Vek is a isturbed. As result of this the second state 'or the supreme atato or pasyanti in whiob for the first time, seeds of differentiation appear. The third stato of the Para Sakti is inadhyama wh loh refers to the inner develop nent of differentiation, All our sastras remain stored in this state. Through sone mediu, they appear in the Vaikhari Vak. In the madhyama state, only atma (wolf). of man can know them. The state is out of the human approach. All Sastras partioularly Saiva Sastras as the tradition mentions, owe their origin to the Madhyama stato which flows out as Vaikhari Vak in tivo streams (panon: grotas), regarded as rive faces of Siva. The rivo facen, 

viz. Isana, Tatpurusa, Sadyo jata, Aghora and Vama, ropre pont rive aspects, ait, Ananda, Iooha, Juana and Iriya, 

which are deeply 8800 iatad with the rive functions, viz., emanation (8rst1), maintenance (sthiti), destruction (Samhara), sono salment (vilaya) and dispensation of grao 

(anugraha), or Siva. AB T.A. mentione, all the Sastres that stream forth from the five races are sixty four and Tapresent various aspects of philosophy. As soon as the Kali are approaches Saiva Sastras begin gradually to dis 

uppear with the gradual disappearance of the sages taught them. Due to the disappearance of the Sastras 

the whole world is engrossed in spiritual darkness. Siva, on seeing these natural consequences of the dis appearance of Sastras, takes pity on men and appears on Kailasa mountain in the form of Srikantha. Ho commanded the sage Durvagas to propagate the knowledge of the Salva Sestras in the world again. The sage, thus commanded, created, by the power or his mind, three sons, Tryambaka, Amardaka and șrinatha. He oharged them with the mission of establishing spiritual order and or teaohing man again the ancient Saiva faith and the Trika dootring in its : three aspects of unity (Abheda), diversity (Bhedat and University-in-diversity (Bhedabhoda). It 16 Txy au baka who was first taught to spread a bheda (unity) dootrine among then. The second dootrina of bheda (diversity) was entrusted to the second son, Amardake. The third son Srinatha was appointed for the propagation of the tenets of Bhad a bheda (unity-in-diversity). 

The orthodox account mont loned above is based on 'Kashmir Shalvimm.. by 1.0.Chatterjee, who has followed Abhinava Gupta, the author of Tantraloka. As a matter or faot, Jayaratha, the commentator of Tantraloka, com anting on the following verse, has elaborately wluoidated the origin of the saiya Tantras from the riro races of the 

Lord: 

Dasastadasavasvasta bhinna Yaoohasanam Filhoh. tatsaram Trikadastram hi Tatsaran Malipimaton 

T.A.I.A. 76.18. 

.. Tantrika conooption of Sadhana - The aim of human striving, according to tantrag and Vedas, 1s the attainment of the Suprema State where all diversitesi come to an end. But their approach to this destination, is dirferont. The obvious reason of this difference is their conception. The conception or Tantras is totally dirrerent from that of the Vedas, The Vedio culture believes in the Mantra-3 adhana as a means to self-roali: gation. In this respect, the attitude or the Tantrika cult is different. It has gone a pace forward. The analyy is or letters is a pooullarity of the Tantrika culture and it lays strags on them as devices for the achievement of self-knowledge. 

.: Tantrika approach to the Supreme Reality is absolutely dirferent from that of the Vedas and the Vedanta. It is chiefly based on the conception of the Supreme. Tantrikas believe in the immanenoe and the transcendence of the Roality. Their sadhana begins from the gross objets understood as symbolle forms of the Supreme Principle. A Sadhaka, first, has to identify himselr with the objeot he is meditating on. After ti Gending this gross object, he has to unify his self with the universal self. Accord ing to the Tantrika Sohool, the Supreme Reality is both, visvamaye (immanent) and visvottirna (transcendent). The advaita Vedantie con coption of the Supreme Selr is transcendent. To this system, the empirical reality has no meanings. In the Vadas, there is no set conception of tho 'supree. The tantrika oonception is based on - sivo bhutva Bivam yajet. 

1. 

Tantras bellevo in the sakti Prinoiple and there fore their Sadhana is secret as distinguished from the 

Vedio Sadhana wh 10h is quite open.The theory of motion (Karman) has great impor tance in the tantrika cult. After tho Identification or the limited self with the universal Boul, actions do not cease. The conception of the Supreme Self, according to Tantras, is balanced state of jnana and kriya. In the supreme state this kriya Sakti in the form of cit sakti 

remains xotivo. 

The congeption of the Supreme Reality, according to the Vedic and the poet Vedio thought, is conso iousness. After the attainment of the supreme state, all aotions cease because that stato represents the domination of 

supreme consciousness. 

Arter the self-assimilation of the rinite with tho infinite, all upasanas (worshipe) on the part of the former come to an end accord ing to the school of Vedanta. But the case in the Tantrika system is different. Even after the self-assimilation or the individual with the supreme self, the upasanas (worships) on the part of the former continue, in the form of Suprema Sakti. 

3. Iraportance of Tantras - At the very outset, 

the study of Tantras reaiinds us of tho uno 1v1lis ed agos. or India. Critios do not hesitate to regard them as a olaas of literature, having 'little sense in much nonsense' All this is due to the Western languages in which they are translated and interpreted. A language in whioh the work is not originally written cannot convey the true sense of the work. Th18 'underestimate of the Tantrik philosophy has been continuing for a long time and the study of the Tantrag has been throw out of the literary oirala. It 18 on account of the fruitful orrorts of Sir Johan Wood roore and Atalvihary Chona who are loading figures of the "Agama Anu-Sandhana Samiti" that the Tantras have come to 

5. 

bo considered as an important part of literature. Now they are regarded as a storehouse of Indian-aoultism.. The oocult side of the Tantras is soientifio and resembles, hypnotiam and fascination, whion are considered NOW 'Thought". 

Tho Brahma anical literature of India dan bo divided into Srut 1 smrti, Purana and Agama. The Tantras are main] derived from Agama Sastra but some of them, in part ar. also based on the Puranas. They are useful in present state or flux prevailing in the Kali age. The Vedio ritual does not suit the present age. Man or to-day has no longer oupacity, longevity and moral strength to carry out the Ved 10 Karma Kanda. Thus the Tantra Sastra presents the Vedio truth, in a wodelled form suitable to the infirmities and the charaoteristics of this age. 

Like the Srutis, Tantras have two ends or human life to rulr11, viz., Abhyudaya (progress) and Nih Sreyas' (Liberation). Their mothods and ways vary accord ing to the human taatos, environments, needs and 1n011 nations. In fundamentals and methods, they airtor from the six schools of India but in essence, they resouble tham and raprosent their monistio philosophy. 

1. Some fundamental dootrines of tantras. 

(a) Hinduism is a combination of various olasses or men and accommodatea mon or different temperaments in its fold. On this basia, five olassos or Tantras, Salva, Sakti, Vaisnaya, Saura (related to the worship or Surya) and Canapatya (related to anapati) are formed in the Hindu gor iptures and they prasoribe different forms of practice. It is a singular distinotion of the Brahmapioal literature that it recognises the fact that all men sannot 

reach that ultimate goal by one method. On the ground that men vary in temperaments and various other ways, they aro classiried under thrsa hoads, viz., men of divine disposition (Divya Bhava) heroio disposition (vira Bhava (and animal disposition (Pasubhava). These forma (Bhuvas) are important factors in the process or Sadhana and on them the competency of an aspirant for any particular kind of practio. depends. All classes of Sadhakas, first of all, have to subdue six enemies - lust, anger, greed, pride 11lusion and envy. These three dispositions (Bhavas) mentioned in other Tantras corres pond to the three Upayas (errorts) 1.6. Sambhava Upaya, Saktopaya and Anava Upayas or T.A. and Ma. II. 

In connection with the dootrine of 'Bhaya(Natura and disposition) referred to above, we should not forget the view of Sarvananda, a celebrated writer of sarrollasa tantra published by Sri Raja Mohan Chalcravarti. The special forte or the author in his Tantra, 1s laid on threefold Bhava and the corresponding Acara. No doubt, the dootrine or Bhava is one of the knotty problem of the 

The author has la 10 nuob' emphasis on the oxplanation or the term 'Bhava' in the 7th Ullas and mentioned it as one supremo existence which multiplios 

itself in various forms (of. Eka sva nahan bhavo nanatyam bhajat ipriye, 8.U.T. 6th u). As a matter of fact the supreme congoiousness appears in the three torns, 1.0., Pagu bhava, Vira bhara and Divya bhaya, which, in a simple language, are the three states of the payahia: principle in the universo. Accord ing to Sarvananda, the ritual, prescribed for the lowest state (animal) is or... also three kinds 1.6. Pagu-acara, Vaisnavacara and Saivacara. Similarly, the author of this Tantra has also mentioned the suba ivisions of thre. chieftates 

1n his work. The remarkable point is that the hero lo state or vira bhava is refleoted in the three sucoegaive cults called daksinasara, vamaoara and sidhantacara. In both olasses of devotees, that is daksiuacara and vamacara, dualism reigns supreme. The third olags is absolutely 

identical with Siva himself and points out monisi. 

. The dootrine or bhava mentioned in the 8th Ullas is speo ially related to the three olasses of men, Pasu Vira and Divya, who are to be admitted into tho spiritual realisation according to the Tantrika Sadhana.. The lowest olass of men whom Tantras doolare to be Pagu' has been advised to regpeot all female olars as mother. Though this lowest olass in form, is man but in nature it is Pasu (animal). Sometimes it 18 also regarded as a child. because it, like a ohild, does not understand its naturo whloh, au a matter of fact, is not different from the nature of supreme reality. For this sort of a Sądhaka, Tantras preach Vatrka Upasana (nother worship). He should regard all prakrti, specially all women as mother. Only those peraons who have infused the idea of motherhood into : all classes of women, are admitted as spiritual aspirants asoord ing to the Tantrika way of realisation. We must remember that almost all Tantras lay much emphasis on this point and respect women as a mother. Sha, in any case is never thought as a thing of animal gratification. 'sho is a mother and she should be regarded as mother till the Sadhaka passes from the lowest stage or Pasubhava from which the Tantrika Sadhana bagian. Thus those persons, who desire to rise spiritually, should obey the regulations or the Tantrika philosophy and work accordingly. In ahort, in the Pasubhava a Sadhaka, who is beginnar, should cultivate the idea of motherhood or Prakrti, Maya and Sakti in his mind. He is just like a child in the hand 

of a mother. 

Sad hakas or heroio state are superior to those of animal state. They are no more children in the hands of a mother. They have subdued the Prakrti, Maya and Sakti and have got a full control over all sorts or nature. They can lead ft to whatever side thay desire. 

The nature becomas submissive to this class or 3adhakas. The feature of this olass and the class vention ed above is that both precoh the idea of airference and hence they are regarded as dualistio'. 

The third olass, 1.6., Divya bhava, is that when the nature is fully identified with the Sadhaka, The 100g as Prakarti, Maya and Sakti totally disappears. It is a supreme State and is hardly distinguished from the "Kaula Avastha' mentioned in Tantraloka. The gradual attainment or this state is the aim of Tantram and they lay nuoh stresa on this point but sometimes this gradual asoont. is not compulsory. An aspirant or Pasu bhava class can obtain the position of a ivya bhava by the high quantity of Sakti pata. Thus a gradual as well as a sudden rise. depends on the quantity of Sakt 1-Pata, which, accord ing to Salva school, intervenøs in the acts of spiritualisation. Besides one central point, which has been laid straga upon by all Advaita Indian philosophies, 18 self-roall nation. The way of sell realisation mentioned by sarvolla -9atantra is fuller than that of the Sankara Vedanta. The knowledge of the sair oannot be complete unless the com prehensive knowledge of the nature (Prakrti) 15 fully obtained (or. Ajnstva Prakrtim devin Brahma-Jaane Karoti Yah Vrtha Jaanam Bhavatta ya Klivasyalinganan Yatha 3,0.1.0.62). We have no ground to doubt the words of Sarvananda, because the crent Sankaradarya benato awarce. 

or the fut 111ty or his Brahma jnana and turned a worshipper or Sakti which appears in the three forms, viz., Sukuma, Jyoti and 8thula or Para, Parapara and Apara, aduota ing to Sarvollagatantra and Tantraloka or Abhinava Gupta respectively. This representation of Sakti in the three forms reminds us of women in various colours to whom the Tantrika 'Sadhakas pay great respeot as mothers. The obvious reason of this esteen paid to Sakti sono option is that the Tantrika philosophy has been found ed on it. The importano a of this principle by which the Tantrika Philosophers can solve the knotty problem of the world creation, cannot be denied. There 18 a perfect barmony in the three forms of Sakti which the Tantrika saints of dirrerent temperaments praotise. 

The discovery of a secret universe in our own body is remarkable in the philosophy of Tantray and vo must regard it as a great achievement of the Tantrika seot of India. The elaborate mention or the physioal Yoga in the Tantra-Sastras represents, as a matter of fact, the inner ritual and has been followed by all the religious sects of to-day in India. Varying ways or initiation teach the Tantrika Sadhaka the spirit of solt-surrender and enable them to realis. the union of siva and Bakti. It is the Tantrika sago who comes to know whatovar is, within him also exists without him. The inner and the outor universes ar, not two separate things for the Tan trika Sadhakas. They are one. It is the external worla by whioh the Tantrika gaints oan comprehend the soorsts lying in the inner universe. It is the peouliarity of the Tantrika sadhana that it tries to meet the supreme Reality by the physioal means. The laner Kowledge cannot be complete unless it is obtained through the physioal means (or. Vyakte Jhapan Finn biedrs gupta Joana na Isyato: 

S.U.T.U. 58). 

(b) Likewisa olosely connected with thes. Bhavas (a isposition) thoro are seven Acaras (Rules of conduot): Veda, Vaisnava, Salya, Dakgina, Vama, sida hanta and Kaula. (Ku. 1. Cha. II). An aspirant should rise to the highest reality gradually through these soven stages of the conduct. In the first atago, ho ought to oultivate physical and mental olganlines.' This purifloation of body as well as of mind is essential to all sorts of religious and spiri tual olevation. Eo should learn the art of devotion, which is an essence of Vaisnayacara in the second stage. In the third stage, he must acquire the knowledge of the universal self and individual self whion 19 a chief symbol of Salvadare. In the fourth stage the three prooed 186 conducts acquired by the Sadhaka, should be strongthened. The fifth Acara 13 a stage of perfaat renunciation and it does not mean that Vama (woman) should be ut 111sed in the religious rite. The Sadhaka has nothing to do with a woman in his rite of 11beration, which is absolutely for bis owa purpose. The Vamaoara is the reverse or Dakaina and should not be misunderstood. It she is aasoo lated with an in his path or renunciation, she helps him there in h1, re ligious performance. In any casa, she is not meant for his animal gratification. A woman is an object of great veneration in all the Tantras. She is considered as a divine mother. The motherly aspect of God 1. tanderer than the ratherly one. Hono. in all the Tantras, God without His Sakti has no plac.. One of the Tantras lays great emphasis (str in an Padatalan Drstve Guruvat bhavayat sada, N1.1.) on the position of a woman. She 13 a great power through whioh the transcendental god manifesta Hingalr. 

The sixth stage is siddhanta in whion an aspirent 

conoludos artor a deliberate consideration and soras hi opinion about the 'mar its or the path or enjoyment (Bhukti. vada) and that of renunciation (Mukt ivada). Thus 'ho pur sues the latter path and reaches the final stage of Kaula whion means a plage without name and form aqoording to the commentator Jayaratha 'Fulam Padamanamakhyaa! T. A. lst. Vell. It should be borne in mind in this ganaoation that it is not a 'void' (Sunya) stage of the nibusstie school which negates all the universal manifestations. It us the stage of a perfeot quiegoence where all limitations dis appear and supreme, oongo lous noss dominates. 

SAM 

The above mentioned seven rulos ot qonduet s roughly correspond to the sot an philosophios Voda, Salya, Vama, Daksa, Kula, Mata and trika. Hvery suga od 188 oam of them is superior to the preceding one 'Vedat Safran tatovamam tatod aksam tatah kulan. Teto Matam, Tatasoapi, 

Sartotta Mam Param.' Comm. T.A. lat, A. T., 18.. The Trika thought in the best of all. 

410 

(c) The doctrine of six physical and 999 Centres or Oakras also forms a most essential part of Trika philosophy and has been understood as aoaneqtedt Kundalini-yoga, which, according to the Tantragastras, 15 a ohier means to realisa Suprame Reality. All thoso Cabral are normally connected with the human notivities wnioh stand in the way of the Supreme Realisation. 3 Tory Cabra resting in the human nierosos represents than IYORIGA of Kalas, Bhuvanas and various lotters of the marker Maya state, called 'Mental oondoptator T apas rive lower Contros from Muladhara to Tiguda ha darr (Muladhara 8vadhistana, Manipura, anuhata and Tisu Cakra) in ascending order are related to the physiaal principles, vis., earth, waters 

12. 

The Sadhaka or this path should begin his Sadhana from the lowest and the grosgost aantre called muladhara and try to awaken tho Kundalini Sakti or oneey chiørly called Male Maya or Suddha Vidya in Tantras, waloh rena Ins 11 every human body in the state or dornanoy or sleep. The sixth Centre called Ajna Cakra is specially related to mind or Manas whion has been also said to be a land or Vikalpas, where all those Cakras ar. tranzoended. It is possible for a Badhaka to attain a pure and tranaparent light of knowledge free from all mental construotions or Vikalpas. The Tantras 'say that montal concepts or Vikalpas are originated from the action of the a lfferent varnas (letters) or Matrkas existing in the centres mentioned a bove. Thos. Matrkas account for all sort of montal sono opts which stand in the way of the realisation of the pure light. Accord ing to the Tantrike philosophy, human body is the storo-house of puro alvino energy in the torn of cit Sakti or Vieuddha Sabda Sakti umderstood as " Kundalalini but as it is usually in dormant oona ition, it has to be roused in activity through a Yogic process. When it is awakened this power serving the mind and Prana or a Sadhaka begins to function in the sonoral form of purging of human body? In this process svory Cakra is alreatly arrested and is absolutely puririca. 

In conneotion with the theory of Calras, it has to be noted that a Cakra 19 e yn bolised as a closed area of an activity ocnsisting of the three aspeots called outer most, intermediary and imost. The outermost espect la usually diploted as Dalaor Petal in a Cakra. The intermediary aspect is reprosented by a radiation within the Dala and the Centre. The Imost aspeot 19 symbol god by the Centre and the Vindu itself. The entiro Calra is a store-house or Vikalpas whioh generate forth Vikalpas 

15. 

every moment. When the awakened Kundalini enters into the region of Matrkas oulled Varnay, they are all desolved and lose their identity in Mada from whioh thoy emanate. As a result of this process, Wada is also desolved Into Vindu or Para Nada ana this Vindu nargos into Unity. By this graded process we shall have the nanifestation of puro knowledge which reveals itself and is never dominated by: any outer influenoo. Thus the transcending of the six Cakras is a main souroe for tho attainment of divino know 

ledro or Divya Jnana which cannot be possible in the system 

or Samkya and Vedanta, because both of them do not accept the prino ipl. or centres or Walras. In the two system, the ideal and the method or attaining it'aro styled dirferently.. 

(a) The votaries or Tantras call suprone-Being as Hansa whion is the revarsa or 'Sohan (I am that God Aspiration and inspiration of breathing system are vila tions of the 'Hansa' whioh is seatsd in our mioroaoem.; Our individual self is automatically uttering the sacredotal formula "Hansa' daily without efforts. (cf. Hakarona, Vabiryati Sakarena Viset Punah Hanseti Paramara Mantran Jivojapati Sarvada, N1.T. Cha. IV.). . 

8. Two methods for self-realisation, Noti Noti method and method of sublimation - Phenomenal appearances of the universe are not a irrerent from Siva ox Brahman mo the Vedantio school calls it, which is under a vol rar. the sake of its illusion, pley or Vaya. Similarly due dividual selves are Siva. They have lost and forgotten their idontity with Siva owing to ignorance which limits the reallsation of this identity. The lost laentity with Biva can be rearfirmed by the two meth or Maya Veda of Vedanta and the method or pubi ination,mentioned in Tantras. The first method moane elimination or negation. It negates the visible world as wreal or Asat. Thus by reduotion of the busk or sheath (Upadhi) into Zero, one can reaffirm the close, contact of the Atman or un Ivarse with the Braban or Siva. This method, accord. ing to which physical appearances are reduced to zoro oan not be ad'o opted by the exponents of the Tantraa, who hold that all phenomana are glimpses or the suprahumaa Raality. They do not deny the multiform universo and therefore, they welcome the method of sublimation according to whion all : the visible objects of the world are said to bo dovieda through which one can approach the Invisible Tho mention or the various Dharanas (ental concentrationa) or tho a iver -gent tattvas described in the 18th to the 15th Adhikara of Ma 18 proof of the fact that the Tantrik 'nature of the book includes the method of sublimation, well-known in the Tantrik literature of India. 

ES 

If we minutely sramine this method of oublination, oited above, it will be found fully based on the two pola rities 1.e. subject and object correspond ing to two epithots - Anam' and 'Idan'. Aham refors to thọ subject whioh se all pervading, und ifferentiated, unmeasured and Infinite. * Idam' (this) points out the objects of the universe, which are not different from the subject whioh 18 under deter minants (Pasas, fettes) and which has forgotten Its duo existence. To approach the subjeot, aspirent should pay his attention to the objeot, 1.9., ignoranog and rettesby which the unlimited (@ubject la delimited), 10 ts the onier characteristics of the Tantrik philosophy that 012 Sadhanas shoula be started from 1. imited objece, ignorance and 111us ions, which, in reality, are seir manifestations or the transcendent aubjact and through whloh 14, gan east 2 be approached. It is said "By that one must pigo by 

15. 

which one falls'. The very poison that k111. bedonos the elixir of life when used by the wisa (0.11.I. Yo.II). Thus the lost 10 entity or individual vol with tho un lvorval selt must be regained by the same factor which has lost it. Various methods, (v 18h1.) such as Panca dasa Vidhi, Panoa vidhi and Triviani mentioned in the second adhikara or the text, are proors of the method of sublimation. It is to be able to ago and from grossness by stages to aubt 111zed sub foot. As a matter of faot purity is hidden in impurity and that must be found in it. Thus it is an approaoh Trosa. diversity to unity, from Bheda to Abheda, fron many to one and from heterogeniety to homogeniety. 

\# By dootrine or sublimation, which I hava 111us trated by the two @pithets 10 am and paham and specially connected with the seven nothods mentioned above as panca daga vidhi ato. 18 meant twofold rise, that is, rige by 

1 rise which depend on the quantity of Sakti -pata. A Sadhaka of the lowest stage (Sakala) 12 tho quan tity of Sakti-Pata 1$ slow, will gradually rlao to Mantra stage passing through the stages of Pralaya Kala and Vijnana kala, corresponding to Suddha vidya from whion he will be gublimated to the position of the supreme prino Iple (siva) and will be one with It. It is the gradual riso. 

The mothod of sudden ris@ 13 differente Any Sadhaka of any low class Sakala, Pralayakala or Vijaana Kala will be roused to the State of Mantra (Suidha vidya)? by the high quantity of Sakti Pata and then from that.. Stato, he would be sublimated to the status or the pupD SÉRO Reality. 

II. INDEX 

A. 

VIIT 

A III 38, Akrte 84. Arnikunda VIII 2. Aghora I 14, 19, III 

26, 50, 7 31. Aja V.:26. . . Ajita XVII 12. Anu I 15, 41, III 34, 

II 12, III 40. Atikesa v 18.. Atikrama VIII 17. Adhvan II 46, 48, 36, 67 

IV 1. Aanistheya II 40.. Adhisthata IX 62. Anamika VII 20. Anusummarit II 51. Anamaya II 41. Anugraha I 35. Anakula VI 6. Anudhyana XVIII 5. Anta II 48, V 13, 26, 

VIII 56 X 48. Anusandhita XIX 65. Anurana III 19. Apara III 81, 50, 58, 

IV 24.. Apavr Jyat I 48, XII 41. 

Akela I 38, II 28. Akhand ita - XXIII - 17. Agnirudra v. 13. Aghora III 33. Aghoryadyaataka *X $7. AnghorIII Attanasa y 18." Anda II 49. Andadvaya IV 24. Atival II 21. Advaita XVIII 74. Adhikarita IV 6. Adhivasa X II Ad hyusta IX 65. Ad hwasana IX 1. Anuganga XII 13, XIII 1 

XI 45 XIX 53. Anuloma IX 5, II S. Anuttama XVII 17. Antahkrti VIII 54, 118. Anudhyata XVIII 5. Anama VII S. .. Anugraha I 20. Anugrahesvara Xx 50. Anubhava XII 819, Apakarsaka XII 8. Apara II. Aparajita III 20. 

A buda ha II 43. A biseoana X 4. Abhiseka VIII 6. Amrta bha III 17, Amrta x 21, XVII 4.. Amrtapurna III 17. Airta III 17. Amrtatanu III 18. Amrtormi III 17. Arrtodgara III 18. Amrtanga III 18.. Amitaz VII 4., Amalasaraka II 17. Amrtougha II 11. Avakagada II 56. Amyika V 31. Avyakta I 80, X 25. Arghega I 49. Arna III 59, XII 9. Arha I 50. Ardha Candra VIII 23.. Agra IX 5. Asiraska XVI 52. Asuta I 87. Astra VIII 9, 13, x 9, 

XVIII 14. 

Abhidhana II 40. Abh inna VIII 5, 9, 16. Abhinnanalini IV 10. Amrtadi Xx 37. . Ambu VI 7, XVII 14. Amrtasyandana III 17. Amrtasya III 18. Amrtaseoana III 18. Amrtadrava II 17. Arba X 60... Amrtosa III 19. Amarega V 16. Amrtavapu III 18. Amvarapada'v 20. Avimuktesa v 20. Aviobi. 2. Avarana VIII 101. Arka VIII 67, DI 30. Ardhanabh. VIII S . Ardhayama VIII BO Ardhanarisa XX 6 Alanjara V 21. Astara XIX 33, IX 40, 52, 57, 

XXII 6. Aksanalika XIX 78. Aksesvara VII 18. 

A III 39 

Akunsana XIIII 28. 

Akarnika XIII 14... 

Akota v 21 Akranti XXI 17, 18. Agney! XIII 20. Agana XXIII 87. Atma I 88. 

Agnoya VIII 59. 

Anava TI 20. 

18. 

. 

At ivahika xx 14. ó Ananda XI 88, XX 10. Anupurvi IV 30 Avaha VII 4. Avesa II 86, II 87. Alabhya VIII 9. Alabhana IT 45. . . 

Ad idvija XVIII 19. Adhyatmika Apyeyini II 52. Apyayana IXI 28. 

Amalabaraka VIII 56. Ayana DX 19. Asadhin Xx 55. 

I III 38. 

. 

Icohakanitva XV 14. 

Iochanivritti II 85. 

Iooha VIII 65 Ioohatva III 5. Inau VIII 67, III 17. 

I III 37. . Igani XVII 15 Isana II 28, 25, 29 Is atva I 21. Isvaranta II 47. 

Isa XVII 14, I 17, III 23, 

· XVII 14. Isvara II 59, V 18, 31, 

VIII 88, X 26. Idasarman XX 56. . 

U III 37. Utkarsaka XVII 9. Ua ita II 45. Utsada XIX 77. Uttana VII 7. va bhava XVIII 8, XX 10. Uddhata XVII 11. 

Ugra V 23, Dooara II 21, 22. Utkarsa XVII s. 

· Otparjini II, 15., Udak XI 11. udag II 6. Damukhi Krta IS, 

U III 37. 

R III 87 

Rtu XIV 

Radhi XX 46, 50. 

Rksa XXII 7. 

R III 37. 

LF III 37: 

Lr1 III 37. 

Ekas iva V 86. 

E III 41. Ekavira V 27. Ekapingekaana v 29. 

Ekaviraka v 25. 

Aindra V 8, 23. Aisa IX 11. 

Aindri III 14. Aisvara VIII 61 

Osta XI 14. 

Ojas XX 2. 

Aum V 25, 

Kakha VII 16, VII 61. Kana Khala v 19. Kanyas. I 19. Kapaliga v 18. Kavarga II 38. Karala VII 8. 

Lati III 43. Kadambake XI Q. Kanyasa XIX 9. Kaneatha VII 5. Kavaca VIII 19. Karali XX 44. 

Karuna II 81. Kalatatva I 27. Kanti XI 50. Kalagn i bhuvana v 1. Kalevisva III 23 II 51. Kali VIII 65. Kas yapi IT 89. Krtaka IIX 74. Krt1 XX $1. Kulastaka XI 48. Kulakramenti II 41. Kulesvara IIX 7. Kuloga II 88. Kutarupa XI 12. Kuamanda bhuvana V B Krodha V 80. Kopa XIX 31. Kaulika XIX 100. Kaimara ✓ 25. Kantha III 47, VIII 22 

XI 13. 

· Kunoita VII 25. Kumbh ipaka V 2. Kansya XIII 8. 

Karnika VIII 82, IX 25, 27. Kalavikarani VIII 63, Kala I 29. Kalesni v 10, VI 11. Kalanala v 29. Kalaratri XVII 30, 32. Kriya VIII 65. . . Klinneta XIII 3. Kulana XIX 68. * Kula XIX 5. Kulacakra XIX s. Kulesena XIX 28 77. Kulucakt 1 XI 10. Kuta XX 60. Kidara v 17. Kedare VIII 62, 69, XXIII 1 Krodesa V 26. Kastaka IX 7. Kaumari III 14. Kausika III 23. Kanthakupa XVI 38. Kanda VIII 56. Kumbhaka XVIII 3 Kampa XI 35, XVIII 8, XX9 

Kha 

Kha VIII 28. Khagesvari VII 2. Khatvanga VII 3. Khasari I 18. 

Khaga XXI 2. Khadgi XX 54. Khetaka VIII 94. 

Gatagata II 4. Garvamaya XVI 1. Garyavarana XVI 6. Gunararana IVI 16. Gandharva y 8. Gokarnaka V 20 Gambhira XI 45. Gandhavarana IIV 6. Gand havaranavasin II 7. 

Gama XIII 15, XXIII 27. Gaya V 19. Guggulu x 20. Qunotkrsta II 60. Curvi 60. Gulpha VI 2. Gopala 43. Granthi VIII 57. Grahana XXIII 7. Or ihitavaktva X B 

. Cha 

. 

. 

Chattana XXI 13. Ghora III 32. Ghosan1 XX 45.. Chanta VII %. 

Chatamana IV 33, 36. Ghurni XI 56, XVII 39. Ghoratari III.31. Ghorarupa I 19 

Ca III 37. Caru VIII 120, 115, 180. Cenunda III 14, VII 11. cittavarana IV 42. Cintamani III 9. Candralarstikara XX Cand 1 VIII 182. 

Cakra VII 2. Catuskika VIII 60. Citi VIII 116. cittabheda XII 8. Ointanaya IV 28. Canda v 26, XX 43. 

Cha 

Cha III 89. Chagalanada XX 65. 

Chedana VIII 80. Chagalanda VI 18. 

J. III 89. 

Jogadananda IL 

Jadata XII 88. 

Jayavardhana III 21. 

Jayamunt1 III 81.. 

Jayarudra III 20. 

Jayalrti III 20. 

Jayada III 21. 

Jayanta III 20. 

Jaya X 44. 

Jayavaha III 80. 

Jayotsaha III 21. Jalavarana XIII 8. 

Jalpega v 18. 

Jagrat II 86. 

Jagradavastha II 27. Jighaneu I 88. 

Jati XXIII 13. Jihya III 46, 48, XI 14. Sivasutra IX 20. Jiva III 89, 84, 60, VIII Jivatman III 46. 

89, II 8, II 12, XII 29. Jyesta v 88, VIII 68, 88. Jvalani VIII 06. 

Jyoti V 26. Jangha III 48. 

Jra III 30. 

Tha. 

Jha III 39. 

Jhinthisa XX 49, 

Ta III 99. 

The III 39. 

Da III 38. 

Dha III 88. 

Na III 37. 

Ta III 40 

Tataambandha I 43 

Tatva III 40. Tatvasa IX 63. Tad Isa II 32. 

Tadahinapurakatva II 54. 

Tatvastaka VI 8. Tadavastha I 35. Tadanans I 19. Tatpati II 28, 41. Tamurti III 19. Tarka XVII 18. Tarpada VIII 11 Tarakantaka I 2. Tigmarooi. XXI el. Tut1 I 29, XIII 87. Turya 11 28, 88.. Turyansa VIII 67, XI 11, 

IXIII 15. Daksas ikhara III 46. Daksamudra III 46.. Daksa sangha III 48.. Dvaya TV 84. 

Dvayaksara IX III 20. Dvija III 45, 46, XVII 29. Dyuti xx 80. Dikga IV 6. Durga III 83. Devayoni-asteka . 88. Duvastaka IV 21. Daisika VIII 184, X 94., Danda III 4, 48, 44, 48, 

VII 2, VIII 56, IX 28, 

XI 18. Dindhi v 16. 

Tarjan1 VII 5. Tala v 4. Talatala v s Tala XI 19. Tvis v 29. Tiro bhavana s 110 I 88 Turyatita II 29, 88. Dagana III 44, 45, Dasa griva X 58. Daksa IX 48. Daksangull VIII 38, XI 19. Daksa janu III 43, 45, 47 

VIII 40. Dravyada VII 4. Dvadanara XX 40, XXII Dviranda VI 13, XX 55. Dipti II 46, 51, Duranda V 21. Durva I 81. Davosa I 8. Dvaita XIII 74. Dandakranta VIII 21. Dandarudha VIII 21. Dandarupa XXIII 20. 

Dha III 87. Dhatri X 21. Dhidan, VI 28 Dhvani VIII 67, III %. 

Dhera II 1, VIII BS. Dharike II 60, Dhi I 80. Dhrt. X 10.Nakara VIII 81. 

· Navaka * 18. 

Nakhala v 19. Mida VIII 23, TTII 16, 82. Nia VIII 56. Nsa XXIII 20, III 48, 

XXIII BO. Nanisvara v 14. SZ Nyati I 8. Nkal I 18, IV 19, TI 74, 

Tati VII 4. Navatman I 36. Navatraaka VIII 23, TK 54. Wabhi XI 13, VIII 33, XI 13. Nayaka X 4., Nigrana x 38. Nitan ba III 46, 48, VIII 2 widra XI 85, IX 10. Niyoga XI 37. Nirabhasa II 42. Nispatti II 16, II 5. Niskrti VIII 131. Naimina V 16. Nanda XX 43. Breneha I 20 

77. 

Naparigrahata XVIII 78. 

prapanca II 12. Nadana III 22. . Nysa III 36. 

- 

Ра 

Padnaka XVII 10. Padmaraga XVI 64. Padarna II 51. Paddhati I 1 

Pararosa I 1. 

Pa III 39. Padakrti VIII 61... Pedatha II 37, 40, 48, 

x 39. Par VI 8, 87, 8, 87, 

VI, 27, VIII 3. Pars II 51, III 38, 52, 

5, IV 24, VIII 13. Paralaghora I 19. Peraladva 1ta XVIII 4. Pesup I 47. Padati x 11. Pagarusa VII 3. Pasupta III 68. Piva IX 68. 

Paya III 87. Para XVIII 4. Parapara III 32, 50, y Paramanu VIII 4. Params XX 27. Pasugraha XI 36. Paramparge III 4, 54, 3 Pasajala XVIII 8.1 Pipillaspared XI 8 Pinakin U 84. 

32. 

Pivana I. 20, V 81. Puman I 27. Purustuta III 64, I 18.. Pura II 64. Pusparaga XVI 63.. Purnahuti VIII 14. Puraka XII 3. Pata VIII 58. Panoe VI 8. Pandantaka T 27. . Pancastaka IV 82. Pradaya II 88, 46. Pranava III 63, VIII 90. Preta XXIII 18. Pradhana IV IV 15, 21, V. 

84, VI 86. Pramatha XX 43. . . Pramoyota VIII 33, TX 85. Pra fosa V gs.. Prajapatya V 9. . . Praptayoga IV 84. Praptopadega IV 34. Pindakrsta Kari XIX 68. 

Pitha IX 18, XIX 95, Pudgala Purusa v 25. Puranga IV 23... Puskara V 16. Pusti xx 5. 

Purva IX 8, 11. Paisaca v 8, 23. Pancaka III 13. Panoara IVI 38.5 Pandavastha III 12, Panoabhaut ika XIV 5, Prativarana IX 28. Pratyaya Karika II 14, Prapanoa II 1, IX 46. Prabuddha II 48. Prabhasa V 16. Pralayakevala 1 25. Prakta II 49. Pranayaua XVII 2.. Praoi VIII 183 Pindastha II 86, 40, 

XIX 30. 

Phao 

Phakara 89. 

Pha III 41. 

Ba III 98. Badaha XIX, X 48. Buddhi IV 81, V 28. ': Balinanda 58. 

Baka XX 54. Buddha II 43, IIX 30. Balesvara III 22. Bala v 13. Buddhyavarana KYI 12. 

Balapramathani VIII.84. 

Brahman IX 8. Brahamasira III 62, X 14.. Brahma 70, 83, 84, XVI 12. Brahmani III 14. 

Brahmarandhra XVI 58, 

XVII-28. BrahmandII 58. Brahmananda x 2. 

Bha III 88. Bhadrakala II Bhama VIII 4. Bhara Bhut1 v 16, :49. Bhinnayon 1 III 36, IV II, À XIX 8. Bhuvana v 1, III 9. Bhuvanadhran TI 11. Bhusari IXI 04. Bhuta II 40... Bhumika XII 81, XIII 9. Bhairava v 19, VIII 34. Bhadramurt1 III 22. Bhaut ika IX 14, 49. Bhrgu XX 34. 

Bhava v 25 Bhadra V 20. Bhava snana VIII 4. Bhayanamaya IV 28, XVII 20. Bhima I 20, IV 18, XX 43. Bhimamudra XX 4 Bhisana I 20. Bhuvanemala TI Bhuvanesa V 89, IX 65. Bhutagrama, 7. Bauvana IX 79. Bhairavasad bhava II 54. Bhairavatamaka IX 85. Bhramana IX 10 " 

Ma III 40. 

Manu VIII 184. 

Manonuga III 23. 

Mala I 16. Malasnana VIII 8. Mahavyapti II 37. • Mahodaya VII 3.. Mahatejas y 28. Mahapabupati I 18. Varjana VIII 7, 32. 

Makerastha XX II 5. Marmastha IX 10. Vanonxana II 456. Manonnant VIII 64. Mahamudra 8 IX 4. Mahaprana VIII 21 D Mahatala v 3. in Mahas II 28 Mahaprabaya II 88. Manakala v 17, 20, 

1 

Vatrgana VIII 40. Madhava V 26, IX 59. .. Mahegyari III 13, 14. Mina X 81, IX 58. Mukt1 IX 8. Vudra YII 7. Must1 VII 7. Mesastha HI 21. Mandala v 87, VIII 7, 

XIII 31. Mantress XN 40, 41. Mantrestara I Mantrannana VIII 11. Mantrin VII 1, 20... 

Matrbhava III %. Maya I 25, I 26. Malini III 10, 38, IV 11 

VIII 8, XII'. Mudrabandha III 5%. Mudgara VII 3. Mula II 6. Mokhala VIII 8. Mandalesvara Matmathe X 45. Mantra I 15, II-a, 31, 41.. 

III 5, II 56. Mantrarat I 28. 

. 

Ya III 38. Yogamudra VII 4. : Yogadhikaritva IV 8. Yoni III 11, 84, 87: Yagisvar i VII 13. togesvári X 29. Yamale VIII 45, XX 42. Yama IX 8. 

Yakarad 1 XIX 87. Yoga II 40, N 4, 6, $ Yogastaka V, 2465 Yogini III 80, VII 1. Yogisi III 14 

Yajana VIII 1 

Yama v 13. Yamya II 14. Yaksa v 8, 23 

R 

Ra III 39. Ragavarana III 18. Raga I 27. Raksasa Y 8, 83. Rudrasakti III 5. Rudravat II 8. 

Raktasutra XX III 22. Ratigokhara IX 34. 86. Ragavarana XVI 260 Rajavarta XVI 681 Rudrani III 03, X 15." Rudrakot! V 200 

Rudra I 44, II 89, V 80. Rupavarana XIV 28. Raudri v 88, VIII 63, 68. Raurava V 2. 

Rupasth II 37, 41, XIX 48, Rupatita II 38, 41, XIX 4%. Recaka XVII 8, XVIIT %. Ranjaka IX 21. Renjakavrti XI 80. 

La III 89. Langali IX 56. Linga IIII I. Lingi IIII 9. Lambika 'VIII B, 57.. Laksya III 8. Laksyabhoda XII 8. . 

Lakulisa VI 12, TX $4 Laluli v 16. Lingayarana X 15. Lingita XVIII 13. Lesa II 1, 7.2: Lohita XX 55. Lakini XX 48, 80 

Va III 38. Vajrini III 64. Vajradehatva XIV.31. Vartula X VIII 2. Valli IX 31. Vanana I 20. Varna II 21. Vahniyat VIII 17. Vak III 42. 

3 Vacaka III 3. Vamomudra III 44, 51, 

VIII 88. Vamapada III 49. Vamas ilhara VIII 88. Vama jangha III 84. Vamanghri VIII 39. Vayuyoga XX 44. 

Vaktra III 48. Vajra III 2. Vajradhara III 84. Vajrak1laka XIX 67. Varga III 11. Varma III '64. Vanni VIII 67. Vahn ipura XIX 64. Vagavaranaja XV 6. Vagisi VIII 64. Vama V 25, VIII 46. Vamostana VIII 2. Vamadeva V 28. Vamadov1 VIII 38 Vamaskandha XI 13. Vayavi XIII 84. Vayavja VIII U. 

Vardhani VIII 103. Vigraha III 9. Vighatá IIIII 28. Vitala v. 4. Vipula II 44. Vid yanga VIII 6. Vimukta XIV 48. Vibhu VIII 64. Vlyugmata XVII 26. Visva 59. Visvarat I 18. vijnanakala IIV 88. Vijaan akevala I 19. Virya I 8. Vira XIX 31. Vedavat IX 80. Vedaved ini III 68. Vaivasvata VII 10 Va ignave Y 10, 24. Vrtta IX 80 Vyapti II 37, IV 24, 28, 

VI 2,4. Vyepinirupa I 28. Vreastha II II 13. 

Vagana XII 21, 40. Vastu VIII 88: Vijaya III 20. Vitti XIII 9, Vidya I 27, VIII 7, IX . Vidyadhipa x 13. Virtanan'a XZ 440 Vimalesvara V.18.: Viloma IX 5. Tulva x 20. Visvesi XX 47. Visvasyari xx 59. Viks ipta IX 19. V13a III 10. Virabhadra XI 13.. Veda IK 6, 18, XVII 17. Vedha II 12. Vaibhava V 24. Vyoma x 9. Vindu VIII 22, 23, XII . XII 15, 32, XVII 84. 

Vyapini IX 57. Vyapaka XV 45. 

. 

Sa III 40. Sakt ipata XI 86. Sakt Imat II 2. ! S1khandi V 87. Sikha XX 46. . . 3 ivahasta IX 44, 58. 

Siva II 48, V35 

Sakti I 44, II 2, 27, 29, 38, 

41 V 40, VII 2, VIII 28. Sakta II 20, 22, 49, 8lkh1 XVII 14, X 85. Blihara III 47. Sirahastavidht II 22,4 Sivapada II 47. 

30. 

sivaprada III 8. Suddha I 47, II 42. " sula III 89, VIII 56, 57; 

II 12. Braga VIII 70. srngara ILX 81. Salva XVIII 10. Satola XVIII 12. Sambhava II 20, 88, XIV 42 Sankara IV 6 . 

r14118 v 18. buipada 111 68. Saunasa x 45. 

siromala III 87, XVII 29. Sruta IV 28, 29. . Sulapadma XXIII SL. Bula III 39, Bularnga XIII 15. Salva I 42. Salvi I 42. Samkukarnaka v 21. Sabhu II 20, 32, .14 Banata i 42 Srikantha v 87, 14 Srotraverana I 

a III 40. Sadura XI 41, 68, IXTI 8. dadut the VIII 90, XIII 80. 

Satka VIII 109. Santha 47. 

So III $9. Sakalatman XIV 56. shflvaka XVII 29. Shtatod ita 11.45. slaasiva y $8. Blayo jata XX 49, Stryambadhara III 29 s fridyusa I 18,4 stryapara II 41. servato bhadra II 86, III 

128, IIX 40 trial seasthita 1 88. 

qayayini 

Sakala I 18, IT 27, IV 16, 

V 88, VI 4, IX '19, 71, 

78, X 26. . Sadobava XIII 54, 40, XVII 34, .. Badatman 5 

Sarvatita II 42 I BU Servavidyadhipalities Svapra II 26, 37,33 Barvartha II 452 Samayastha IXIV 8amayi II 27. 

Samananna II 

Samadhan anrte 

Shavesa II 18, 17, 21, 

123, IV 34. Staya VIII 185. . gdudayika VIII 80. . i s fanayogi vari XII 33. 

s ha IV 33. seksu III B. supya III 80. Skaipta II 44. suspanna IV 31, XVII 8. Sua VIII 65. 84 B7 : Sulaanita I Supta II. 81 Buna II 48. Barranti XI 17. gan hita II 87. Sanrodhini VII 31. Bana buddha III 27, Bancakrama VIII 8. Svar 81, 89. $thbastaka 82.7. stond VII 4. str tha III 24. Bvaja II 89. Sapi I 41, II 18. athebrara 21.1 Svad II 50. ethe II 82. svablate IV 81. 

8 amudia III 37. Samud ghata XVII 17. Gaman ukrama III 2. - Sarupya IX 29. 81adhayogisvaritantra I & Siadhi xx 48, 50. 91adyayoga IV 37. Sutala v 4. Suprabha XX 51. Supra buda na II 43, IIX 33. suvartula XIII 8. Busiva III 23, Susiddha IV 38. Suryalarstikera DII Sutra v Samghata I 41, III 84, 

XIII 28. Sampradaya XXIII 24. garvitti II 25, XI 15, 

XIII 18. 8thayara Sthanu v 20, XII 12, 49. Sthit 1 I 20, 249, Sthula VI 28. Spandana XVIII 8. Sprhana III 23, Sparsavati XIV 28. Syapthatra II 35 

Syerupa II 2 

Syarnakcake 

2014 

. QII 88. 

Hataka V 4. Heya I 14, 40, 50, IV 4. Haya xx , Harikesi XX 46. Harindu' v 18 

Hrit III 45. Frdeya III 48. Hayanana XX 44, 46. Hara IX 48, 49, 88. Hala VII 3. Hastavrti' xv om 

Kaa III 40. Ksapana Il. Ksama XVIII 76. 

Kaarna II 51. Kama x 20. Kairavrlsa VIII 188. 

1 

Trika II 34, VIII 109. Tritayatya VI 29. Tridandis XX 55.. 

Trikona XIII 22 Trikhanda VI 10, TX 82. Trigula IV 25, VII 2, VIII 

81, XXII 21. 

Jnana IT 9, 28., Jnana Candra Il. Jnanodaya I 23. Inaya IV 4. 

Joana Sakti III 7. Jnanad 1ksa VI Jnan1 VIII 65,